
We earlier described two taggers for French: the statistical one
having an accuracy of 95-97 % and the constraint-based one 97-99 %
 (see ,).  The disambiguation has been already described, and here we discuss the other stages of the process, namely
the definition of the tagset, transforming a current lexicon into a
new one and guessing the words that do not appear in the lexicon.

Our lexicon is based on a finite-state transducer lexicon
 .  The French description was originally built by Annie Zaenen and Carol Neidle, and later refined by Jean-Pierre Chanod
Ch94.

 Related work on French can be found in . 

We describe in this section criteria for selecting the tagset.  The
following is based on what we noticed to be useful during the
developing the taggers.

Our basic French morphological analyser was not originally designed
for a (statistical) tagger and the number of different tag
combinations it has is quite high.  The size of the tagset is only 88.
But because a word is typically associated with a sequence of tags,
the number of different combinations is higher, 353 possible sequences
for single French words.  If we also consider words joined with
clitics, the number of different combinations is much higher, namely
6525.

A big tagset does not cause trouble for a constraint-based tagger
because one can refer to a combination of tags as easily as to a
single tag.  For a statistical tagger however, a big tagset may be a
major problem.  We therefore used two principles for forming the
tagset: (1) the tagset should not be big and (2) the tagset should not
introduce distinctions that cannot be resolved at this level of
analysis.

As distinctions that cannot be resolved at this level of analysis
should be avoided, we do not have information about the tense of the
verbs.  Some of this information can be recovered later by performing
another lexicon lookup after the analysis.  Thus, if the verb tense is
not ambiguous, we have not lost any information and, even if it is, a
part-of-speech tagger could not resolve the ambiguity very reliably
anyway.  For instance, dort (present; sleeps) and dormira (future; will sleep) have the same tag VERB-SG-P3, because they are both singular, third-person forms and
they can both be the main verb of a clause.  If needed, we can do
another lexicon lookup for words that have the tag VERB-SG-P3
and assign a tense to them after the disambiguation.  Therefore, the
tagset and the lexicon together may make finer distinctions than the
tagger alone.

On the other hand, the same verb form dit can be third person
singular present indicative or third person singular past historic
(pass simple) of the verb dire (to say).  We do not
introduce the distinction between those two forms, both tagged as VERB-SG-P3, because determining which of the two tenses is to be
selected in a given context goes beyond the scope of the tagger.
However, we do keep the distinction between dit as a finite verb
(present or past) on one side and as a past participle on the other,
because this distinction is properly handled with a limited contextual
analysis.

Morphological information concerning mood is also collapsed in the
same way, so that a large class of ambiguity between present
indicative and present subjunctive is not resolved: again this is
motivated by the fact that the mood is determined by remote elements
such as, among others, connectors that can be located at
(theoretically) any distance from the verb.  For instance, a
conjunction like quoique requires the subjunctive mood:
Quoique, en principe, ce cas soit frquent.
(Though, in principle, this case is [subjunctive] frequent.)

The polarity of the main verb to which a subordinate clause is
attached also plays a role.  For instance, compare:
Je pense que les petits enfants font de jolis dessins.
(I think that small kids make [indicative] nice drawings.) 
Je ne pense pas pas que les petits enfants fassent de jolis dessins.
(I do not think that small kids make [subjunctive]  nice drawings.) 
Consequently, forms like chante are tagged as VERB-P3SG
regardless of their mood.  In the case of faire (to do, to make)
however, the mood information can easily be recovered as the third
person plural are font and fassent for indicative and
subjunctive moods respectively.

The person seems to be problematic for a statistical tagger (but not
for a constraint-based tagger).  For instance, the verb pense,
ambiguous between the first- and third-person, in the sentence Je
ne le pense pas (I do not think so) is disambiguated wrongly because
the statistical tagger fails to see the first-person pronoun je
and selects more common third-person reading for the verb.

We made a choice to collapse the first- and second-person verbs
together but not the third person.  The reason why we cannot also
collapse the third person is that we have an ambiguity class that
contains adjective and first- or second-person verbs.  In a sentence
like Le secteur matires (NOUN-PL) plastiques
(ADJ-PL/NOUN-PL/VERB-P1P2)... the verb reading for plastiques is impossible.  Because noun -- third-person sequence is
relatively common, collapsing also the third person would cause
trouble in parsing.

Because we use the same tag for first- and second-person verbs, the
first- and second-person pronouns are also collapsed together to keep
the system consistent.  Determining the person after the analysis is
also quite straightforward: the personal pronouns are not ambiguous,
and the verb form, if it is ambiguous, can be recovered from its
subject pronoun.

Surface forms under a same lexical item were also collapsed when they
can be attached to different lemmata (lexical forms) while sharing the
same category, such as peignent derived from the verb peigner (to comb) or peindre (to paint).  Such
 coincidental situations are very rare in French . However, in the case of suis first person singular of the
auxiliary tre (to be) or of the verb suivre
(to follow), the distinction is maintained, as we introduced
special tags for auxiliaries.

We have not introduced gender distinctions as far as nouns and
adjectives (and incidentally determiners) are concerned.  Thus a
feminine noun like chaise (chair) and a masculine noun
like tabouret (stool) both receive the same tag NOUN-SG.

However, we have introduced distinctions between singular nouns (NOUN-SG), plural nouns (NOUN-PL) and number-invariant nouns
(NOUN-INV) such as taux (rate/rates).  Similar
distinctions apply to adjectives and determiners.  The main reason for
this choice is that number, unlike gender, plays a major role in
French with respect to subject/verb agreement, and the noun/verb
ambiguity is one of the major cases that we want the tagger to
resolve.

Ignoring gender distinction for a French tagger is certainly counter
intuitive.  There are three major objections against this choice:

Gender information would provide better disambiguation,

Gender ambiguous nouns should be resolved, and

Displaying gender provides more information.



There is obviously a strong objection against leaving out gender
information as this information may provide a better disambiguation in
some contexts.  For instance in le diffuseur diffuse, the word
diffuse is ambiguous as a verb or as a feminine adjective.  This
last category is unlikely after a masculine noun like diffuseur.

However, one may observe that gender agreement between nouns and
adjectives often involve long distance dependencies, due for instance
to coordination or to the adjunction of noun complements as in une envie de soleil diffuse where the feminine adjective diffuse agrees with the feminine noun envie.  In other words,
introducing linguistically relevant information such as gender into
the tagset is fine, but if this information is not used in the
linguistically relevant context, the benefit is unclear.  Therefore,
if a (statistical) tagger is not able to use the relevant context, it
may produce some extra errors by using the gender.

An interesting, albeit minor interest of not introducing gender
distinction, is that there is then no problem with tagging phrases
like mon allusion (my allusion) where the masculine form
of the possessive determiner mon precedes a feminine singular
noun that begins with a vowel, for euphonic reasons.

Our position is that situations where the gender distinction would
help are rare, and that the expected improvement could well be
impaired by new errors in some other contexts.  On a test suite
  extracted from the newspaper Le Monde (12 000 words) tagged with either of our two taggers, we counted only three errors
that violated gender agreement.  Two could have been avoided by other
means, i.e. they belong to other classes of tagging errors.  The
problematic sentence was:
L'arme interdit d'autre part le passage...
(The army forbids the passage...)
where interdit is mistakenly tagged as an adjective rather than
a finite verb, while arme is a feminine noun and interdit a masculine adjective, which makes the noun-adjective
 sequence impossible in this particular sentence. 

Another argument in favour of gender distinction is that some nouns
are ambiguously masculine or feminine, with possible differences in
meaning, e.g. poste, garde, manche, tour, page.  A tagger that would carry on the distinction would then
provide sense disambiguation for such words.

Actually, such gender-ambiguous words are not very frequent.  On the
same 12 000-word test corpus, we counted 46 occurrences of words which
have different meanings for the masculine and the feminine noun
readings.  This number could be further reduced if extremely rare
readings were removed from the lexicon, like masculine ombre (a
kind of fish while the feminine reading means shadow or shade) or
feminine litre (a religious ornament).  We also counted 325
occurrences of nouns (proper nouns excluded) which do not have
different meanings in the masculine and the feminine readings,
e.g. lve, camarade, jeune.

A reason not to distinguish the gender of such nouns, besides their
sparsity, is that the immediate context does not always suffice to
resolve the ambiguity.  Basically, disambiguation is possible if there
is an unambiguous masculine or feminine modifier attached to the noun
as in le poste vs. la poste.  This is often not the case,
especially for preposition + noun sequences and for plural
forms, as plural determiners themselves are often ambiguous with
respect to gender.  For instance, in our test corpus, we find
expressions like en 225 pages,  leur tour, 
ces postes and pour les postes de responsabilit for which
the contextual analysis does not help to disambiguate the gender of
the head noun.

Finally, carrying the gender information does not itself increase the
disambiguation power of the tagger.  A disambiguator that would
explicitly mark gender distinctions in the tagset would not
necessarily provide more information.  A reasonable way to assess the
disambiguating power of a tagger is to consider the ratio between the
initial number of ambiguous tags vs. the final number of tags after
disambiguation.  For instance, it does not make any difference if the
ambiguity class for a word like table is [feminine-noun,
finite-verb] or [noun, finite-verb], in both cases the tagger
reduces the ambiguity by a ratio of 2 to 1.  The information that can
be derived from this disambiguation is a matter of associating the
tagged word with any relevant information like its base form,
morphological features such as gender, or even its definition or its
translation into some other language.  This can be achieved by looking
up the disambiguated word in the appropriate lexicon.  Providing this
derived information is not an intrinsic property of the tagger.

Our point is that the objections do not hold very strongly.  Gender
information is certainly important in itself.  We only argue that
ignoring it at the level of part-of-speech tagging has no measurable
effect on the overall quality of the tagger.  On our test corpus of
12 000 words, only three errors violate gender agreement.  This
indicates how little the accuracy of the tagger could be improved by
introducing gender distinction.  On the other hand, we do not know how
many errors would have been introduced if we had distinguished between
the genders.

We avoid categories that are too small, i.e. rare words that do not
fit into an existing category are collapsed together.  Making a
distinction between categories is not useful if there are not enough
occurrences of them in the training sample.  We made a category MISC for all those miscellaneous words that do not fit into any
existing category.  This accounts for words such as: interjection oh, salutation bonjour, onomatopoeia miaou, wordparts
i.e. words that only exist as part of a multi-word expression, such as
priori, as part of a priori.

In a few instances, we introduced new categories for words that have a
specific syntactic distribution.  For instance, we introduced a
word-specific tag PREP-DE for words de, des and du, and tag PREP-A for words , au and aux.  Word-specific tags for other prepositions could be considered
too.  The other readings of the words were not removed, e.g. de
is, ambiguously, still a determiner as well as PREP-DE.

When we have only one tag for all the prepositions, for example, a
sequence like
determiner noun noun/verb preposition
is frequently disambiguated in the wrong way by the statistical
tagger, e.g. Le train part  cinq heures (The train
leaves at 5 o'clock).  The word part is ambiguous between a
noun and a verb (singular, third person), and the tagger seems to
prefer the noun reading between a singular noun and a preposition.

We succeeded in fixing this without modifying the tagset but the
side-effect was that overall accuracy deteriorated.  The main problem
is that the preposition de, comparable to English of, is
the most common preposition and also has a specific distribution.
When we added new tags, say PREP-DE and PREP-A, for the
specific prepositions while the other prepositions remained marked
with PREP, we got the correct result, with no noticeable change
in overall accuracy.

 We have a lexical transducer for French  which was built  using Xerox Lexical Tools ,.  In our work we do not modify the corresponding source lexicon but we employ our finite-state
calculus to map the lexical transducer into a new one.  Writing rules
that map a tag or a sequence of tags into a new tag is rather
straightforward, but redefining the source lexicon would imply complex
and time consuming work.

The initial lexicon contains all the inflectional information.  For
instance, the word danses (the plural of the noun danse or
a second person form of the verb danser (to dance) has the
 following analyses: 
 danser +IndP +SG +P2 +Verb
 danser +SubjP +SG +P2 +Verb
 danse  +Fem +PL +Noun

Forms that include clitics are analysed as a sequence of items
separated by the symbols [ or ] depending on whether the clitics
 precede or follow the head word.  For instance vient-il (does he come, lit. comes-he) is analysed as: 
 venir +IndP +SG +P3 +Verb
         ] il +Nom +Masc +SG +P3 +PC

From this basic morphological transducer, we derived a new lexicon
that matches the reduced tagset described above.  This involved two
major operations:

handling cliticised forms appropriately for the tagger's needs.

switching tagsets


In order to reduce the number of tags, cliticised items (like vient-il are split into independent tokens for the tagging
application.  This splitting is performed at an early stage by the
tokeniser, before dictionary lookup.  Keeping track of the fact that
the tokens were initially agglutinated reduces the overall ambiguity.
For instance, if the word danses is derived from the expression
danses-tu (do you dance, lit. dance-you), then it can only
be a verb reading. This is why forms like danses-tu are
tokenised as danses- and tu, and forms like chante-t-il are tokenised as chante-t- and il.  This in
turn requires that forms like danses- and chante-t- be
introduced into the new lexicon.

With respect to switching tagsets, we use contextual two-level rules
that turn the initial tags into new tags or to the void symbol if old
tags must simply disappear.  For instance, the symbol +Verb is
transformed into +VERB-P3SG if the immediate left context
consists of the symbols +SG +P3.  The symbols +IndP, +SG and +P3 are then transduced to the void symbol, so that
vient (or even the new token vient-) gets analysed merely
as +VERB-P3SG instead of +IndP +SG +P3 +Verb.

A final transformation consists in associating a given surface form
with its ambiguity class, i.e. with the alphabetically ordered
sequence of all its possible tags.  For instance danses is
associated with the ambiguity class [+NOUN-PL +VERB-P1P2],
i.e. it is either a plural noun or a verb form that belongs to the
collapsed first or second person paradigm.

Words not found in the lexicon are analysed by a separate finite-state
transducer, the guesser.  We developed a simple, extremely compact and
efficient guesser for French.  It is based on the general assumption
that neologisms and uncommon words tend to follow regular inflectional
patterns.

The guesser is thus based on productive endings (like ment for
adverbs, ible for adjectives, er for verbs).  A given
ending may point to various categories, e.g. er identifies not
only infinitive verbs but also nouns, due to possible borrowings from
English.  For instance, the ambiguity class for killer is [NOUN-SG VERB-INF].

These endings belong to the most frequent ending patterns in the
lexicon, where every rare word weights as much as any frequent word.
Endings are not selected according to their frequency in running
texts, because highly frequent words tend to have irregular endings,
as shown by adverbs like jamais, toujours, peut-tre, hier, souvent (never, always,
maybe...).

Similarly, verb neologisms belong to the regular conjugation paradigm
characterised by the infinitive ending er, e.g. dballaduriser.

With respect to nouns, we first selected productive endings (iste, eau, eur, rice...), until we realised a
better choice was to assign a noun tag to all endings, with the
exception of those previously assigned to other classes.  In the
latter case, two situations may arise: either the prefix is shared
between nouns and some other category (such as ment), or it must
be barred from the list of noun endings (such as aient, an
inflectional marking of third person plural verbs).  We in fact
introduced some hierarchy into the endings: e.g. ment is shared
by adverbs and nouns, while iquement is assigned to adverbs
only.

Guessing based on endings offers some side advantages: unknown words
often result from alternations, which occur at the beginning of the
word, the rest remaining the same, e.g. derivational prefixes as in
isralo-jordano-palestinienne but also oral transcriptions
such as les z'oreilles (the ears), with z' marking
the phonological liaison.  Similarly, spelling errors which account
for many of the unknown words actually affect the ending less than the
internal structure of the word, e.g. the misspelt verb forms appellaient, geulait.  Hyphens used to emphasise a word, e.g. har-mo-ni-ser, also leave endings unaltered.  Those side advantages
do not however operate when the alternation (prefix, spelling error)
applies to a frequent word that does not follow regular ending
patterns.  For instance, the verb construit and the adverb trs are respectively misspelt as constuit and trs, and are not properly recognised.

Generally, the guesser does not recognise words belonging to closed
classes (conjunctions, prepositions, etc.) under the assumption that
closed classes are fully described in the basic lexicon.  A possible
improvement to the guesser would be to incorporate frequent spelling
errors for words that are not otherwise recognised.

We extracted, from a corpus of newspaper articles (Libration), a
 list of 13 500 words unknown to the basic lexicon.  Of those unknown words, 9385 (i.e. about 70 %) are capitalised words, which
are correctly and unambiguously analysed by the guesser as proper
nouns with more than 95 % accuracy.  Errors are mostly due to foreign
capitalised words which are not proper nouns (such as Eight) and
onomatopoeia (such as Ooooh).

The test on the remaining 4000 non-capitalised unknown words is more
interesting.  We randomly selected 800 of these words and ran the
guesser on them.  1192 tags were assigned to those 800 words by the
guesser, which gives an average of 1.5 tags per word.

For 113 words, at least one required tag was missing (118 tags were
missing as a whole, 4 words were lacking more than one tag: they are
misspelt irregular verbs that have not been recognised as such).  This
means that 86 % of the words got all the required tags from the
guesser.

273 of the 1192 tags were classified as irrelevant.  This concerned
244 words, which means that 70 % of the words did not get any
irrelevant tags.  Finally, 63 % of the words got all the required
tags and only those.

If we combine the evaluation on capitalised and non-capitalised words,
85 % of all unknown words are perfectly tagged by the guesser, and
92 % get all the necessary tags (with possibly some unwanted ones).

The test on the non-capitalised words was tough enough as we counted
as irrelevant any tag that would be morphologically acceptable on
general grounds, but which is not for a specific word.  For instance,
the misspelt word statisiticiens is tagged as [ADJ-PL
NOUN-PL]; we count the ADJ-PL tag as irrelevant, on the ground
that the underlying correct word statisticiens is a noun only
(compare with the adjective platoniciens).

The same occurs with words ending in ement that are
systematically tagged as [ADV NOUN-SG], unless a longer ending
like iquement is recognised.  This often, but not always, makes
the NOUN-SG tag irrelevant.

As for missing tags, more than half are adjective tags for words that
are otherwise correctly tagged as nouns or past participles (which
somehow reduces the importance of the error, as the syntactic
distribution of adjectives overlaps with those of nouns and past
participles).

The remaining words that lack at least one tag include misspelt words
belonging to closed classes (come, trs, vavec) or to
irregular verbs (constuit), barbarisms resulting from the
omission of blanks (proposde), or from the adjunction of
superfluous blanks or hyphens (quand-mme, so
cit).  We also had a few examples of compound nouns
improperly tagged as singular nouns, e.g. rencontres-tl, where the plural marking only appears on the
first element of the compound.

Finally, foreign words represent another class of problematic words,
especially if they are not nouns.  We found various English examples
(at, born, of, enough, easy) but also Spanish, e.g. levantarse, and Italian ones, e.g. palazzi.

We have described the tagset, lexicon and guesser that we built for
our French tagger.  In this work, we re-used an existing lexicon.  We
composed this lexicon with finite-state transducers (mapping rules) in
order to produce a new lexical transducer with the new tagset.  The
guesser for words that are not in the lexicon is described in more
detail.  Some test results are given.  The disambiguation itself is
 described in . 

Acknowledgments

want to thank Irene Maxwell and anonymous referees for useful comments.

Jean-Pierre Chanod.
A Broad-Coverage French Grammar checker: Some Underlying Principles.
in the Sixth International Conference on Symbolic and Logical
Computing.
pp 97-111, Dakota State University, 1993.

Jean-Pierre Chanod.
Finite-State Composition of French Verb Morphology.
Technical Report MLTT-005, 16 pages, Rank Xerox Research Centre,
Grenoble, 1994.
http://www.xerox.fr/

Jean-Pierre Chanod and Pasi Tapanainen.
Statistical and Constraint-Based Taggers for French.
Technical report MLTT-016, Rank Xerox Research Centre,
Grenoble, 1994.

Jean-Pierre Chanod and Pasi Tapanainen.
Tagging French - comparing a statistical and a constraint-based
method.
In the proceedings of the Seventh Conference of the European
Chapter of the ACL.
pages 149-156.  Association for Computational Linguistics, Dublin, 1995.
cmp-lg/9503003.

Anne-Marie Derouault.
Modlisation d'une langue naturelle pour dsambiguation des
chanes phontiques.
Doctorat d'tat s sciences,
Universit VII, 1985.

Marc El-Bze.
Les modles de langage probabilistes: quelques domaines
d'application.
Thse d'habilitation  diriger des recherches.
LIPN: Universit Paris-Nord, 1993.

Lauri Karttunen.
Finite-State Lexicon Compiler.
Technical report, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center, 1993.

Lauri Karttunen and Ken Beesley.
Two-Level Rule Compiler.
Technical report, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center, 1992.

Lauri Karttunen, Ron Kaplan and Annie Zaenen.
Two-level morphology with composition.
In proceedings of Coling-92.  The fourteenth International
Conference on Computational Linguistics.
Vol I, pages 141-148.  Nantes, 1992.

This appendix contains an example of a tagged corpus.

Les 		 DET-PL travaux 		 NOUN-PL devaient- 		 VERB-P3PL -ils 		 PRON se 		 PC d'erouler 		 VERB-INF en 		 PREP s'eance 		 NOUN-SG pl'eni`ere 		 ADJ-SG ou 		 CONN en 		 PREP commissions 		 NOUN-PL ? 		 PUNCT Les 		 DET-PL d'el'egu'es 		 NOUN-PL pouvaient- 		 VERB-P3PL -ils 		 PRON , 		 CM comme 		 COMME d' 		 PREP habitude 		 NOUN-SG , 		 CM ent'eriner 		 VERB-INF des 		 DET-PL r'esolutions 		 NOUN-PL de 		 PREP la 		 DET-SG direction 		 NOUN-SG du 		 PREP parti 		 NOUN-SG qui 		 CONN n' 		 NEG avaient 		 VAUX-P3PL pas 		 ADV 'et'e 		 VAUX-PAP discut'ees 		 PAP-PL `a 		 PREP la 		 DET-SG base 		 NOUN-SG ? 		 PUNCT Ce 		 DET-SG prologue 		 NOUN-SG d'esordonn'e 		 ADJ-SG enfin 		 ADV termin'e 		 ADJ-SG , 		 CM le 		 DET-SG pr'esident 		 NOUN-SG en 		 PREP exercice 		 NOUN-SG de 		 PREP la 		 DET-SG Ligue 		 NOUN-SG qui 		 CONN , 		 CM selon 		 PREP la 		 DET-SG r`egle 		 NOUN-SG de 		 PREP la 		 DET-SG rotation 		 NOUN-SG des 		 PREP fonctions 		 NOUN-PL , 		 CM est 		 VAUX-P3SG actuellement 		 ADV un 		 DET-SG Mac'edonien 		 NOUN-SG , 		 CM est 		 VAUX-P3SG mont'e 		 PAP-SG `a 		 PREP la 		 DET-SG tribune 		 NOUN-SG pour 		 PREP exposer 		 VERB-INF la 		 DET-SG nouvelle 		 ADJ-SG strat'egie 		 NOUN-SG des 		 PREP communistes 		 NOUN-PL yougoslaves 		 ADJ-PL . 		 PUNCT Dans 		 PREP un 		 DET-SG discours-fleuve 		 NOUN-SG qui 		 CONN constituait 		 VERB-P3SG le 		 DET-SG plus 		 ADV petit 		 ADJ-SG d'enominateur 		 NOUN-SG commun 		 ADJ-SG des 		 PREP positions 		 NOUN-PL respectives 		 ADJ-PL des 		 PREP partis 		 NOUN-PL des 		 PREP six 		 NUM r'epubliques 		 NOUN-PL et 		 CONN des 		 PREP deux 		 NUM provinces 		 NOUN-PL autonomes 		 ADJ-PL , 		 CM Mr 		 NOUN-SG Milan 		 NOUN-INV Pancevski 		 NOUN-INV s' 		 PC est 		 VAUX-P3SG prononc'e 		 PAP-SG pour 		 PREP la 		 DET-SG libert'e 		 NOUN-SG d' 		 PREP association 		 NOUN-SG politique 		 ADJ-SG ( 		 PUNCT et 		 CONN donc 		 ADV l' 		 DET-SG abandon 		 NOUN-SG du 		 PREP monopole 		 NOUN-SG de 		 PREP la 		 DET-SG Ligue 		 NOUN-SG ) 		 PUNCT , 		 CM pour 		 PREP la 		 DET-SG r'eforme 		 NOUN-SG du 		 PREP syst`eme 		 NOUN-SG 'economique 		 ADJ-SG et 		 CONN politique 		 ADJ-SG , 		 CM ainsi 		 ADV que 		 CONJQUE du 		 PREP fonctionnement 		 NOUN-SG de 		 PREP la 		 DET-SG LCY 		 NOUN-INV . 		 PUNCT C' 		 PRON est 		 VAUX-P3SG la 		 DET-SG seule 		 ADJ-SG faon 		 NOUN-SG , 		 CM a-t- 		 VAUX-P3SG -il 		 PRON dit 		 PAP-SG , 		 CM de 		 PREP " 		 PUNCT pr'eserver 		 VERB-INF les 		 DET-PL valeurs 		 NOUN-PL de 		 PREP la 		 DET-SG r'evolution 		 NOUN-SG socialiste 		 ADJ-SG yougoslave 		 ADJ-SG " 		 PUNCT . 		 PUNCT 

presented in the ACL SIGDAT workshop on From Texts To Tags:
Issues In Multilingual Language Analysis.  pages 58-64. University
College Dublin, Ireland, 1995.
  We have not
systematically compared the two approaches, i.e. with or without
 gender distinction, but previous experiences  with broad coverage parsing of possibly erroneous texts have shown that gender
agreement is not as essential as one may think when it comes to French
parsing.
  The tags represent: present
indicative, singular, second person, verb; present subjunctive,
singular, second person, verb; and feminine, plural, noun
  The tags
for il represent: nominative, masculine, singular, third
person, clitic pronoun.
  On various
large newspaper corpora, an average of 18 % words are unknown: this
is mostly due to the high frequency of proper nouns.
