
This paper concerns how to generate and understand discourse anaphoric
noun phrases, or noun phrases (NPs) that evoke a discourse entity
already in the discourse model (Webber webber78).
Dale dale89 dale92 implements Gricean
constraints on informativeness for generating discourse anaphoric NPs.
However, his model follows the tradition of assuming that distinct
constraints govern pronouns versus phrasal NPs
 (cf.  ). Centering gjw83 kameyama85, a model of local
attentional state sidner79, has been applied primarily to
definite pronouns.  I argue that Gricean constraints should be applied
equally to discourse anaphoric pronouns and phrasal NPs, and that
integrating centering and informational constraints covers a broader
 range of cases.  In , I present an analysis of all discourse anaphoric NPs (N=1,233) in a corpus of ten narratives
showing that semantic explicitness depends largely on informational
constraints.  Discourse anaphoric NPs almost never provide new
information, and are rarely more informative than necessary.  In
 , I show how Dale  Reiter's dalereiter94 generation model can be augmented to apply uniformly to pronouns and
phrasal NPs for both generation and understanding.  While centering
has been used to account for informationally under-specified pronouns,
I argue that centering also accounts for certain over-specified
 phrasal NPs.  In , I integrate centering with the augmented Gricean model and discuss the extended coverage.  Results in
  include a one-way correlation of overly informative discourse anaphoric NPs with shifts in global discourse structure.  In
the conclusion, I discuss directions for extending the integrated
model in ways that might indirectly account for this correlation.

In this section, I present the results of an analysis of all discourse
anaphoric NPs in a corpus of spoken narratives directed at the
question of how informative NPs are, relative to their contexts of
occurrence.  The first subsection describes the corpus and coding
features. The next subsection presents results showing that discourse
anaphoric NPs in the corpus, whether pronominal or phrasal, are rarely
more informative than necessary, and if so, tend to occur at shifts in
global discourse structure.

 Fig.  identifies four possibilities regarding the semantic informativeness of an NP relative to its context.  Three of them
pertain to the following Gricean principles, referred to by
Dale dale89 as informational adequacy and efficiency: the
speaker should be sufficiently informative to unambiguously identify
the intended referent (adequacy), and the speaker should be no more
informative than necessary (efficiency).  The boxed pronouns in (2a)
 of Fig.  are both adequate and efficient (well-specified): it is clear what the pronouns refer to; less informative forms (zero
pronouns) would be ungrammatical.  The phrasal NPs in (2b) are
adequate but not efficient (over-specified).  The pronominal NP in
(2c) is inadequate (under-specified; efficiency does not apply to
inadequate NPs): ``it'' could refer either to the ladder or the
tree. A fourth possibility is that an NP may perform two functions, to
identify the referent and to add information about it, as in (2d)
 (over-determined). In Fig. , the feature +/- increasing distinguishes between over-determined and over-specified NPs.

The corpus consists of ten narrations from Chafe's Pear
stories chafe80.  Chafe recorded and transcribed subjects who
had been asked to view the same movie and describe it to a second
person.  The movie contained seven sequential episodes about a man
picking pears. It had a vivid sound track, but no language.  As part
of a long term study of the relationship between linguistic features
and discourse structure []
 [] [],
discourse anaphoric NPs in the corpus had already been coded for
coreference relations and location.  Location of an NP is represented
here in terms of the containing sentential utterance and discourse
 segment, as described below.  Fig.  illustrates an excerpt. 

Chafe chafe80 identified three types of prosodic phrases from
graphic displays of intonation contours.  A period indicates a phrase
terminated by a pitch fall, a question mark indicates final level or
rising pitch, and a comma indicates phrase final--not
sentence-final--intonation.  The transcriptions here show all repeated
and incomplete words and phrases, non-lexical articulations such as
``uh, um, tsk'', and vowel lengthening as indicated by `-'.  Pause
locations are shown as `[ps]'.

Sentential utterances are defined be a non-overlapping sequence of
units that completely covers the discourse.  Briefly, a new sentential
utterance begins with a functionally independent clause (FIC) if it is
immediately adjacent to the preceding FIC.  Otherwise it begins at the
onset of the prosodic phrase where the next FIC begins.  An FIC is a
tensed clause that is not a verb argument, a restrictive relative
clause, or one of a set of formulaic ``interjection'' clauses (e.g.,
``You know'' with no clausal argument; for full details
 cf. ).  Material between clauses includes sentence or word fragments, and non-lexical articulations (e.g.,
``um'').  Locations and sequence numbers of the seven sentential
 utterances in Fig.  are shown in column 2. 

The global context is structured into sequential segments,
multi-utterance units whose utterances are presumed to be more related
to one another semantically and pragmatically than to other
 utterances.  The segments numbered 6-8 (col. 1 of Fig. ) were derived from an empirical study described
in []. Each narrative was segmented by 7 new,
untrained subjects.  Subjects were instructed to place segment
boundaries in transcripts whenever the narrator had finished one
communicative task and begun a new one.  They were restricted to
placing boundaries between prosodic phrases.  To focus their attention
on the criterion, subjects' were also instructed to label segments
with a brief description of the speaker's intention.

The size and number of segments per subject per narrative varied widely,
from a rate of 5.5% to 41.3% (Avg.=16%), with segment widths ranging
from 1 to 49 phrases (Avg.=5.9).  Despite this variation, the number of
times 4 to 7 subjects assigned boundaries in the same place was
extremely significant (using Cochran's Q cochran50;
cf. []).  We took agreement among at least 4
subjects as the threshold for empirically validated boundaries.

A surface constituent is considered to be a discourse anaphoric NP if
it occurs in free variation with syntactically prototypical NPs, and
 corefers with a preceding NP (cf. ).  One type of empty category is also included, namely zero pronoun subjects of
 FICs conjoined by ``,'', ``and'', etc.  In Fig. , the sequence of coreferential NPs used to refer to the little boy are
 coindexed.  Segments 7 and 8 in Fig.  both begin with an utterance containing an NP referring to the boy.  At the onset of
segment 7, a phrasal NP is used to refer to him (U30) whereas at
the onset of segment 8 (U33), a definite pronoun is used.  But
a pronoun could have replaced the phrasal NP in U30 with no
loss of information.  So the phrasal NP is over-specified but
not over-determined; the attributes ``boy'' and ``little''
were already mentioned in U28.  The pronoun subject in U33is locally well-specified because the boy is the only animate entity
mentioned in U32; it is globally well-specified because the boy
is the only entity in the discourse with a bicycle.

The goal of the analysis is to determine whether relative
informativeness of NPs correlates with global discourse structure
 (cf.  ). Any phrasal NP that is discourse anaphoric is potentially
over-specified, whereas a definite pronoun will only be over-specified
if a zero pronoun could have been used.  I first sorted the discourse
anaphoric NPs in the corpus (N=1,233) into the three categories of
phrasal NPs (PhrNPs; N=563), explicit pronouns (PROs: definite,
indefinite, demonstrative; N=544), and zero pronominals (ZPs; N=126).
Then I identified all pairs of coindexed NPs where NP2 was more
explicit than NP1.  This procedure identified 128 discourse
anaphoric NPs in the corpus that were potentially over-specified or
over-determined.  The sole over-determined NP, illustrated in
 Fig. , occurs relatively late in the narrative (U85); it seems mainly to provide contrast (cf. ``that old man'' vs. those little boys'').

Potentially over-specified NPs were sorted into four mutually exclusive
categories--well-specified, segment onset, attentional shift, and
reiterative.  A potentially over-specified NP is well-specified if a
less explicit form would have been ambiguous or unclear.  The containing
utterance is included in the context since the proposition expressed in
an utterance can disambiguate a referring expression.  A potentially
over-specified NP that is not well-specified, but which occurs in the
first utterance of a new segment, is classified as a segment onset.  The
segments in the coded Pear corpus arguably contain intra-segmental
shifts of attention associated with changes in temporal aspect, or
shifts in discourse reference time (for definitions assumed here,
cf. []). The third category, attentional shift,
consists of these cases.  A fourth catch-all category includes, e.g.,
repetitions, repairs, contrastive NPs and unexplained cases.

 Table  indicates that most potentially over-specified NPs (N=127) were either well-specified (46%) or occur at an empirically
verified segment onset (16%) or a hypothesized attentional shift
(23%).  Of the 69 NPs whose nearest antecedent was in a distinct
segment, 29% occurred at a segment onset.  Over a third (36%) of the
NPs whose antecedent was in the same segment, and 12% of those whose
antecedent was in a distinct segment occurred at an intra-segmental
attentional shift. In sum, in the coded Pear corpus, NPs that re-evoke
existing entities seem to be rarely over-specified (68/1233, or 5.5%)
or over-determined (1/1233).  Of the 68 over-specified cases (columns
2-5), 20 (30%) correlate with segment onsets independently identified
by naive subjects, and 29 (42%) appear to correlate with
intra-segmental attentional shifts.  Thus, an over-specified NP is
more likely than not to correlate with an attentional shift (72%).
Note however, that the reverse implication does not hold, that is, it
is not the case that a segment shift is likely to be signalled by an
over-specified NP.

To account for the choice of modifiers in phrasal discourse anaphoric
NPs, it is necessary to determine how attributes are selected from the
information known about a discourse entity.  According to
Grice's grice75 maxim of quality, speakers should be relevant.
With respect to discourse anaphoric NPs in the Pear stories, NP
modifiers are derived from what I refer to as focussed attribute sets,
independent of whether the NP is over-specified.  Focussed attribute
sets comprise the following three categories of relevance.  First, an
attribute set can be in focus because it was mentioned in the most
 recent phrasal NP.  For example, in Fig. , the boy is referred to in U30 as ``the little boy,'' repeating
attributes mentioned in the last phrasal NP referring to the boy (in
U28).

Second, the focussed attribute set may specify the most recently
mentioned location of an entity.  The subject NP in U17 of
 Fig.  () refers to one man as ``the man up in the tree'' to distinguish him from the second man who came by with a goat.  The tree is the last mutually known location of
the former.  Finally, an attribute set can be in focus because it
pertains to a key narrative event that the entity has been an agent
of.  Intuitively, an event is more central to a narrative the more
difficult it is to describe the narrative without mentioning that
event.  Operationally, key events occur more frequently than others
both within and across narratives.  For example, the main adult
character is often described as ``the pear picker,'' or as
``the man who was picking pears'' (see U108 of
 Fig. , ), and so on; the other main character is often described as ``the thief,'' ``the boy
who stole the pears,'' ``the boy with the pears,'' and so on.

How to order the focussed attribute sets for a given discourse entity
is a topic for further investigation. Here, I simply assume that the
three types of attribute sets mentioned above--where applicable--are
in focus.  I also assume that the focussed attribute sets of an entity
(FAVe) are updated as the discourse progresses.

The data reported above indicates that in the Pear corpus, definite
pronouns and phrasal NPs are rarely over-specified or over-determined.
In this section, I describe a processing model to account for this
observation.  In the next section, I discuss how centering can be
integrated with this model to account for under-specified pronouns,
and certain over-specified phrasal NPs.  First, I briefly review
Dale's dale89 dale92 model, including his more recent
work with Reiter dalereiter94.  Then I modify this model to
apply to understanding as well as generation; to include the current
utterance in the context of evaluation; to apply informational
constraints uniformly to pronouns and phrasal NPs; and to select
modifiers on the basis of focused attribute-value pairs.

Dale dale89 generates anaphoric
pronouns and phrasal NPs by distinct means.  In
EPICURE dale89, a system for generating
recipes, a definite pronoun is always generated to refer to the
`discourse center', which is analogous to the backward-looking center
 of  , but is domain specific. It is the entity that results from the next recipe operation.  For example,
rice1 will be the center after an utterance of Stir the
rice1.

Dale dale89 requires phrasal NPs to be
distinguishing descriptions.  As in Webber webber78, Dale
assumes that the discourse model represents the discourse entities
that have already been evoked, and the attribute-value pairs
describing them.  For any set of entities U,
Dale dale89 defines a distinguishing
description of an entity e in U to be a set of attribute-value pairs
that are true of e, and of no other members of U.  This enforces
adequacy.  He defines a minimal distinguishing description to be one
where the cardinality of the attribute-value pairs cannot be reduced.
 This addresses efficiency. 

Dale dale89 defines the discriminatory
power ()
of an attribute-value pair [A, V] that is true
of a discourse entity e in a universe of entities U in terms of the
cardinality N of U, and the total number n of entities in U that
[A, V] is true of:


ranges in value from 0 to 1.  If 
is true of only
one of the entities in the set U, then 
     is 1,  and   is a distinguishing description of the entity.    

  Dale's dale89 algorithm for  constructing a distinguishing description of e in U, given a set    of attribute-value pairs that are true of e, briefly  works as follows.  First compute   for each member of .  If all values of   are 0, no unique description can be  constructed.  Otherwise, select the attribute-value pair with the  highest value to add to the description, and reset U to be only those  entities in the initial U that the selected attribute-value pair is  true of.  Repeat this process, terminating when an attribute-value  pair with a discriminatory power of 1 has been selected.  The selected  attribute-value pairs constitute the input description for a surface  NP.    

  In recent work, Dale  Reiter dalereiter94 enforce a  range of Gricean constraints using an algorithm based on human  behavior that is simpler and faster than their previous  algorithms  . It performs less length-oriented optimization, thus balancing brevity against
lexical preference.  The output NPs are not guaranteed to be maximally
short because humans occasionally use unnecessary modifiers.  The
5.5% rate of over-specified discourse anaphoric NPs in the Pear data
also supports the relaxation of brevity, but is partly conditioned by
 attentional factors (cf.-). 

In this section I illustrate the role of 


in processing
definite pronouns and phrasal NPs.
C_describe is a 4-place relation among a discourse entity E, a
surface NP, the current utterance context ,
and the
discourse context C that requires 


to be a
distinguishing description of E relative to C.  For generation, NP is
solved for given an instantiation of the remaining three arguments,
whereas E is solved for during understanding (assuming Prolog's
control structure).

A definite pronoun that is a distinguishing description is also a
minimal distinguishing description because its length is 1. In
generation, C


attempts first to find a definite pronoun to
satisfy the uninstantiated NP argument, succeeding if the pronoun is a
distinguishing description.  For generating the pronoun ``he''
 in U4 of Fig. , the arguments of  

are:

  

The utterance context is assumed to be a feature structure co-indexed
with any relevant discourse entities other than the uninstantiated
 variable E.  By using the utterance as part of the input in solving for NP, given information that appears
anywhere in the current utterance can filter entities from the
discourse context, following
Dale's dale89 algorithm.  New
information about an entity in the utterance is not mutually known,
 and has no discriminatory power . 

For present purposes, the last argument of 


is first
instantiated to the most recent focus space, and in turn to other
focus spaces until a solution is found.
Dale dale89 takes the universe of
 discourse to be partitioned into focus spaces (cf. ), with the most recent focus space being the most accessible, and making no
assumptions regarding relative accessibility of earlier focus spaces.
Similar assumptions are made here.  I assume that segment boundaries
in the Pear corpus correspond to focus spaces, and that some focus
spaces may be composed of others. I assume the existence of an
inference mechanism that constrains how focus spaces are signalled
during generation, and how focus spaces are inferred during
understanding.  In recent work, for example, Litman and I report on
algorithmic methods for identifying segment boundaries in the Pear
corpus using features of prosody, cue words and referential
NPs [].  Given such a mechanism, a new focus
space would be added to the discourse model after a
segment onset has been processed.

 In (), FS1 appears as the initial context argument of 

.
The only animate entity in FS1 is e1,
previously described as a man picking pears in a pear tree who looks
like a farmer, is plump, has a mustache, and is wearing a white apron
(utterances 1-3, not shown here).  The feature structures
corresponding to all but one of the definite pronouns ``he, she,
 it'' or ``they'' will be rejected as a description of e1because e1 is neither plural, non-animate or female. The pronoun ``he'', represented as the attribute-value pairs ([type: human], [gender: male], [cardinality: 1]),
not only describes e1, it is also a minimal distinguishing
description.

An analogous process applies to understanding the same pronoun in
U4, with the entity variable E uninstantiated, NP instantiated to
``he'', and the utterance and discourse context instantiated as
above.  Given a distinguishing description, there is
guaranteed to be exactly one solution to E. However, the search
problem increases with the size of the context.  Partitioning the
search space into focus spaces controls the search through the
discourse model to some degree.  (Integrating centering with


as described below guides the search even
further.)  For present purposes, 


returns E instantiated
to e1 after searching through the entities in FS1.
The remaining NPs exemplified here are understood in a similar fashion.

Given a context where there is no definite pronoun solution to NP,


will attempt to construct a phrasal NP, preferably with
 no modifiers.  In Fig. , a new, singular, male, human entity is added to the context at U8: a boy who comes by on a bicycle
(e2).  Subsequent references to the boy or the man must
discriminate between them.  The utterance context for the subject NP
of U9--

--does not identify e1 because U5--``he
comes down''--leads to the inference that the man is no longer in
the tree.  However, e1 is a male adult and e1 is a male
child, a distinction encoded by the common nouns ``man'' versus
``boy''.  Since ``man'' is what Dale 
Reiter dalereiter94 refer to as a basic attribute, ``man'' will be selected as the head noun.  The determiner will be
definite because the entity is already in the context (but
 cf. ).  The resulting NP the man is a minimal distinguishing description because no pronoun is
a distinguishing description.

 Fig.  illustrates a context where a phrasal NP without modifiers could not both have a head noun that specifies a basic
attribute, and be a distinguishing description.  It also illustrates
the problematic nature of relations among distinct focus spaces.  In
generating the subject NP in U17, the last argument of


is first instantiated to FS4.  The pears referred
to in U15 of segment 4 are some pears that e1 picked, so in
order to interpret U15, e1 must be brought into focus.  This
side-effect of resolving the reference to the pears could be
implemented by adding e1 to FS4, or by resetting the current
focus space to a more encompassing focus structure that includes
FS3 and FS4.  I believe further empirical work is needed to
resolve such issues.  In any case, I assume that the context for
generating U17 includes both e1 and e2.  Because these
two entities are the same type, a distinguishing description of
e1 must contain discriminatory modifiers.  Features for
generating the modifiers are selected from FAVe1, which here
contains only two sets of salient attributes. Since e1's location
is the most recently evoked, it is used in generating the NP.

Above, I noted that centering can add structure to the search space
 for understanding discourse anaphoric NPs.  Fig.  illustrates another reason to integrate centering with 

.
 In U10 of Fig. , the subject NP (``the boy'') is not a pronoun even though the utterance context is a distinguishing
description of e2.  The boy (e2) is mutually known to have
been on a bicycle at the time of the event mentioned in utterance
U8.  Temporal processing (cf. []) would lead
to the inference that the boy is still on the bicycle after U9.
Thus a definite pronoun is presumably well-specified, and the model
presented so far would generate ``he''.  However, a pronoun
would produce a garden path effect in this context; i.e., it would be
interpreted as referring to the man until ``bicycle'' has been
processed.

The 


relation has three limitations that centering can
compensate for.  First, 


constrains the semantic content
of a discourse anaphoric NP, but not its grammatical role.  Second, as
noted below, centering predicts that a pronoun can be under-specified.
Third, an explanation is needed for the over-specified NP the
 boy in U10 of Fig. .  In this section, I indicate how centering is interleaved with 

.
Centering is a more
local process so it applies first.

Centering is a model of local focus of attention that constrains the
 use of definite pronouns  .  One of the  discourse entities  evoked by an NP in an utterance  Ui may be the backward-looking center (CB)  of Ui, the current local focus of attention.  Alternatively, the CB
of Ui (CBUi) might not be explicitly mentioned (realized)
 in the utterance .  The discourse entities mentioned in Ui comprise the forward looking centers (CFs), ordered by
increasing obliqueness of grammatical
 role   to represent the likelihood that they will be mentioned in the subsequent utterance.  The
 centering principle  predicts that if CBUi and CB

Ui-1 are the same entity, then the NP evoking CBUiwill be a third person, definite pronoun.

  

 Example () illustrates that where the semantics of the utterance and commonsense reasoning do not discriminate among possible
referents for an ambiguous pronoun, there is an independent effect of
local attentional constraints.  Centering predicts that the preferred
 interpretation of the pronoun in () is Carmella.  But in this context, neither the pronoun alone nor the utterance is a distinguishing
description of anyone, so the pronoun is under-specified.

  

 Kameyama kameyama85 used examples like () to illustrate how commonsense reasoning and lexical semantics can
override the default centering predictions for pronoun interpretation.
Centering would predict that `Carmella' is the backward-looking center
 of (), and that the default interpretation of the pronoun in  () would thus be `Carmella'.  Instead, () is interpreted as a continuation of the description of the perceptual
 event in ().  Kameyama kameyama86 posits property sharing of features of adjacent utterances as a constraint on CB,
where the shared property can be subject (or non-subject) grammatical
 role (cf. ), as in (), or what she refers  to as empathy, as in ().  Note that because `Rachel' is already known to be the object of the perceptual event in
 (), the utterance context in () is a distinguishing description of `Rachel.'



 Fig.  shows all of one segment and part of another one where the subject pronouns of all the utterances are coreferential.  On the
one hand, the CB of the segment initial utterance U108 is the
same as the CB of U107, conflicting with the idea expressed
 in  that centering transitions reflect global discourse  coherence (cf. ).  On the other hand, integrating centering and 


can account for both NPs in U108and support inferences consistent with a global focus shift.

 Earlier in the narrative excerpted in Fig. , three boys helped the pear thief after he had fallen off of his bicycle, and were
rewarded with three pears.  Segment 21 describes their adventures
after the pear thief leaves.  In generating utterance U108, the
input to the generator will be a representation of an event in which
the boys eat their pears. The set of three boys is designated as the
new CB.  Because CB

U108 is the same as CB

U107, it
 should be realized as a pronoun , and by property  sharing  , it should be realized as the subject of the current utterance.  Centering and Gricean
constraints coincide here in that the definite pronoun ``they''
is also a minimal distinguishing description.

To generate the phrasal NP object in U108, the process is
analogous to that discussed above for generating ``the man up in
 the tree'' in Fig. . The context argument of 


is first set to Cf

U107.  Since neither
Cf

U107 nor the most accessible focus space (FS21)
contains a representation of e2, the context argument will be
reset until e2 is in a focus space on the focus stack.  Focussed
attribute sets are then used to generate the relative clause.

For understanding the subject NP in U108, recall that centering
applies before 

.
The subject pronoun will be assumed to
realize the CB of the utterance, and will be assigned the default
interpretation of e1.  Application of 


leads to the
recognition that ``they'' is also a distinguishing description
of e1 relative to CF

U107. In this fashion, centering
prunes the search space to the single entity satisfying the
informational constraints imposed by 

.
In understanding
the object NP, the context argument must be instantiated to a more
inclusive focus space, since neither the previous utterance nor the
previous segment contains any entities described by this NP.

The integrated model also accounts for the problematic phrasal NP
 in Fig. , discussed above.  We saw that for U9 and U10, repeated below, the phrasal subject of U9 was
well-specified, but the phrasal subject of U10 was
over-specified, and a pronoun would be generated instead. But
as noted above, a pronoun subject would have a garden path effect.

U9:  
the man (e1) is in the tree (e3),
U10:
and the boy (e2) gets off the bicycle (e4),

Kameyama's version of centering kameyama86 differs
 from  in allowing an utterance to have a null CB. U10 would have a null CB because there is no definite pronoun
constrained by property sharing that corefers with an NP in the
previous utterance; in fact no NPs in U10 refer to entities
mentioned in U9.  A definite pronoun subject in U10 would be
assumed to be CBU10 and would be inferred to refer to e1.
This accounts for the garden path effect.  Consequently, a pronoun
must be blocked.  Because no entity in U9 is referred to in
U10, the input for generating U10 will be annotated as
having a NULL CB. This imposes output constraints requiring the
subject and object NPs to be other than definite pronouns.  As a
consequence, 


will not try to find a pronoun solution to
the uninstantiated NP argument.  In the first phrasal NP solution, the
head would denote a basic category and the NP would have no
modifiers, thus generating the existing phrase ``the boy''.  In
sum, centering relaxes the constraint otherwise imposed by


that an NP cannot be over-specified.

I have presented an analysis of discourse anaphoric phrasal NPs in a
corpus of narrative monologues showing that pronouns and phrasal NPs
are rarely over-specified.  Future research should indicate to what
degree this generalization applies to other genres and modalities.
Centering predicts conditions under which an under-specified pronoun
can be used, but says little about the interpretation of phrasal NPs.
I have outlined a processing model that integrates the attentional
constraints of centering with aspects of Grice's maxims of quantity
and quality.  For enforcing the maxim of quantity, I rely on Dale's
algorithm for constructing distinguishing
descriptions dale89 dale92,
which I apply uniformly to
pronouns and phrasal NPs for both generation and understanding.  For
enforcing the maxim of quality, I combine aspects of Dale 
Reiter's dalereiter94 preferred attributes with the construct
of focussed attribute sets derived from the corpus analysis.  In
contrast to Dale  Reiter dalereiter94, distinguishing
descriptions are evaluated using the current utterance context as a
filter, and by instantiating the discourse context successively to the
Cf list of the preceding utterance, then the current focus space, then
other focus spaces, until a solution is found.

Centering provides one mechanism for relaxing the requirement that an
NP (either pronominal or phrasal) should be a distinguishing
description.  Another mechanism would be needed to relax informational
constraints at shifts in focus structure, so as to account for the
one-way implication of over-specified NPs with global shifts of
 attention (Table ).  However, further investigation is needed to determine how to integrate local and global discourse
processing.  When neither the Cf list nor the current focus space is
the appropriate context for understanding or generating a discourse
anaphoric NP, I have assumed that either an earlier focus space or a
more inclusive one must be accessed.  Some of the examples presented
here suggest that the contextual dependencies captured by the use of
focused attributes might constrain the relation of each new utterance
to the global discourse model.  For example, the segment onset in
 Fig.  (U108) contains two NPs, one of which is the same as the CB of the preceding utterance.  Maintaining the same CB relates
U108 and its focus space (FS22) to the most recent focus
space FS21.  But the object NP expresses attributes last
mentioned in segment 17, thus relating U108 to the earlier focus
space FS17.  If the global structure is a tree, the relation of
U107 to both segments 21 and 17 might indicate how high up in the
tree to locate the new focus space.  Alternatively, an investigation
of such relations might provide evidence about the nature of global
structure, such as whether it is a tree or a lattice.

This work was partly supported by NSF grant IRI-91-13064.
Thanks to Robert Dale, Ehud Reiter, and Megumi Kameyama
for valuable comments on ideas presented here.

W. L. Chafe.
The Pear Stories.
Ablex Publishing Corporation, Norwood, NJ, 1980.

W. G. Cochran.
The comparison of percentages in matched samples.
Biometrika, 37:256-266, 1950.

R. Dale and E. Reiter.
Computational interpretations of the Gricean maxims
  in the generation of referring expressions.
To appear in Cognitive Science.

R. Dale.
Cooking up references.
In Proceedings of the 27th Annual ACL, 1989.

R. Dale.
Generating Referring Expressions..
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1992.

H. P. Grice.
Logic and conversation.
In Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 3: Speech Acts, pages 41-58.
  Academic Press, New York, 1975.

B. J. Grosz and C. L. Sidner.
Attention, intentions and the structure of discourse.
Computational Linguistics, 12:175-204, 1986.

B. J. Grosz, A. K. Joshi, and S. Weinstein.
Providing a unified account of definite noun phrases in discourse.
In Proceedings of the 21st ACL, 1983.

Barbara J. Grosz, A. K. Joshi, and S. Weinstein.
Towards a computational theory of discourse interpretation, 1986.
Ms.

M. Kameyama, R. J. Passonneau, and M. Poesio.
Temporal centering.
In Proceedings of the 31st ACL, 1993.

M/ Kameyama.
Zero Anaphora: The Case of Japanese.
PhD thesis, Stanford University, 1985.

M. Kameyama.
A property-sharing constraint in centering.
In Proceedings of the 24st ACL, 1986.

D. Litman and R. Passonneau.
Combining multiple knowledge sources for discourse segmentation.
In Proceedings of the 33rd ACL, 1995.

D. Litman and R. Passonneau.
Developing algorithms for discourse segmentation.
In Working Notes of AAAI Spring Symposium Series on Empirical
  Methods in Discourse Interpretation and Generation, 1995.

R. J. Passonneau and D. Litman.
Intention-based segmentation: Reliability and correlation with
  linguistic cues.
In Proceedings of the 31st ACL, 1993.

R. J. Passonneau and D. Litman.
Empirical Analysis of Three Dimensions of Spoken
        Discourse: Segmentation, Coherence and Linguistic Devices.
In E. Hovy and D. Scott, eds., Burning Issues in Discourse.
Springer Verlag, To appear.

Rebecca J. Passonneau.
Getting at discourse referents.
In Proceedings of the 27th ACL, 1989.

R. J. Passonneau.
Protocol for coding discourse referential noun phrases 
and their antecedents.
Technical report, Columbia University, 1994.

R. J. Passonneau.
Frame shifts: Perlocutionary meaning and discourse reference.
In Conference on Focus and Natural Language Processing,
  Kassel,  Germany, 1994.

R. J. Passonneau.
Interaction of the segmental structure of discourse with
  explicitness of discourse anaphora.
In E. Prince, A. Joshi, and M. Walker, eds.,   Proceedings of the Workshop on Centering Theory in Naturally Occurring
  Discourse. Oxford University Press, To appear.

R. Reichman.
Getting Computers to Talk Like You and Me.
MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1985.

E. Reiter.
Generating appropriate natural language object descriptions.
PhD thesis, Harvard University, 1990.

C. L. Sidner.
Towards a computational theory of definite anaphora
  comprehension inEnglish discourse.
Technical report, MIT AI Lab, 1979.

B. Webber.
A formal approach to discourse anaphora.
Technical Report 3761, Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc., 1978.

  The work reported here
was not supported by Bellcore.
  Cf.  Reiter reiter90
for a discussion of problems in generating maximally efficient NPs
using Dale's framework, and Dale  Reiter dalereiter94
for an argument that maximal efficiency is psychologically
implausible.
  For simplicity, the utterance context represents
certain semantic arguments as quoted strings.
  For
simplicity, I am ignoring the difference between grammatical gender
and sex.
