
This paper describes part of our ongoing investigation on the use of
formal deduction in linear logic to explicate the relationship between
syntactic analyses in Lexical-Functional Grammar (LFG) and semantic
interpretations. The use of formal deduction in semantic
interpretation was implicit in deductive systems for categorial syntax
 , and has been made explicit through applications of the Curry-Howard parallelism between proofs and terms
in more recent work on categorial semantics
 ,, labeled deductive  systems  and flexible categorial systems  . Accounts of the syntax-semantics interface in the categorial tradition require that syntactic and
semantic analyses be formalized in parallel algebraic structures of
similar signatures, based on generalized application and abstraction
(or residuation) operators, and structure-preserving relations between
them.  Those accounts therefore force the adoption of categorial
syntactic analyses, with their strong dependence on phrase structure
and linear order.

 In contrast, our approach uses linear logic  to represent the connection between two dissimilar levels of
representation, LFG f-structures and their semantic interpretations.
F-structures provide a crosslinguistically uniform representation of
syntactic information relevant to semantic interpretation that
abstracts away from the details of phrase structure and linear order
in particular languages. This generality is in part achieved by using
grammatical functions rather than functor-argument relations to
represent syntactic predicate-argument relationships.  As
 notes, however, the flatter,
unordered, grammatical function structure of LFG does not fit well
with traditional semantic compositionality, based on functional
abstraction and application, which mandates a rigid order of semantic
composition.  We are thus forced to use a more relaxed form of
compositionality, in which, as in more traditional ones, the semantics
of each lexical entry in a sentence is used exactly once in
interpretation, but without imposing a rigid order of composition. It
turns out that linear logic offers exactly what is required for a
calculus of semantic composition for LFG, in that it can represent
directly the constraints on the creation and use of semantic units in
sentence interpretation without forcing a particular hierarchical
order of composition except as required by the properties of
particular lexical entries.

We have shown previously that the linear-logic formalization of the
syntax-semantics interface for LFG provides simple and general
analyses of modification, functional completeness and coherence, and
 complex predicate formation ,.  In the present paper, the analysis is extended to the interpretation of
quantified noun phrases.  After an overview of the approach, we
present our analysis of the compositional properties of quantifiers,
and we conclude by showing that the analysis correctly accounts for
scope ambiguity and its interactions with bound anaphora.

LFG assumes two syntactic levels of representation: constituent
structure (c-structure) represents phrasal dominance and
precedence relations, while functional structure (f-structure) represents syntactic predicate-argument structure.
For example, the f-structure for sentence  is given
in .
As illustrated, a functional structure consists of a collection
of attributes, such as , , and , whose values can, in
turn, be other functional structures.  The following annotated
phrase-structure rules can generate the f-structure in .

These two phrase structure rules do not encode semantic
information; they specify only how grammatical functions such as
 are expressed in English.  The f-structure metavariables
 and  refer, respectively, to the f-structure of the mother
of the current node and to the f-structure of the current node
 .  The annotations on the S rule indicate, then, that the f-structure for the S has a  attribute
whose value is the f-structure for the NP daughter, and that the
f-structure for the S is the same as the one for the VP daughter.  The
relation between the nodes of the c-structure and the f-structure for
the sentence  is expressed by means of arrows in (1):


Unlike phrase structure rules, lexical entries specify semantic
as well as syntactic information.  Here are the lexical entries
for the words in the sentence:
Just like phrase structure rules, lexical entries are
instantiated for a particular utterance.  The metavariable 
in a
lexical entry represents the f-structure of the c-structure mother of
(an instance of) the entry in a c-structure.  The syntactic information
given in lexical entries consists of equality statements about the
f-structure, while the semantic information consists of assertions
about how the meaning of the f-structure participates in various
semantic relations.

The semantic information in a lexical entry, which we will call the
semantic contribution of the entry, is a linear-logic formula
that constrains the association between semantic structures
projected from the f-structures mentioned in the lexical entry
 , and their semantic interpretations.  The semantic projection function 
maps an
f-structure to a semantic structure encoding information about its
meaning, in the same way as the functional projection function maps c-structure nodes to the associated f-structures.  The
association between 
and a meaning P is represented by the
atomic formula 

,
where 
is an otherwise
uninterpreted binary predicate symbol.  (In fact, we use not one but a
family of relations 


indexed by the semantic type of
the intended second argument, although for simplicity we will omit the
type subscript whenever it is determinable from context.)  We will
often informally say that P is f's meaning without referring to
the role of the semantic structure 
in 

.
We will see, however, that f-structures and their semantic
projections must be distinguished, because in general semantic
projections carry more information than just the association to the
meaning for the corresponding f-structure.

We can now explain the semantic contributions in .
If a particular occurrence of `Bill' in a sentence is
associated with f-structure f, the syntactic constraint in the
lexical entry Bill will be instantiated as


and the semantic constraint will be
instantiated as 

,
representing the association between 
and the
constant 
representing its meaning.

The semantic contribution of the appointed entry is more
complex, as
it relates the meanings of the subject and object of a clause
to the clause's meaning. Specifically, if f is the
f-structure for a clause with predicate ()
`appoint', the
semantic contribution asserts that if f's subject 


has
meaning X and (linear conjunction )
f's object


has meaning Y, then (linear implication
)
f has meaning 

 . 

In the semantic contribution for appointed in ,
the linear-logic connectives of multiplicative conjunction and linear implication 
are used to specify how the meaning
of a clause headed by the verb is composed from the meanings of the
arguments of the verb. For the moment, we can think of the linear
connectives as playing the same role as the analogous classical
connectives conjunction and implication, but we will soon see that the
specific properties of the linear connectives are essential to
guarantee that lexical entries bring into the interpretation process
all and only the information provided by the corresponding words.  The
semantic contribution of appointed asserts that if the subject
of a clause with main verb appointed means X and its object
means Y, then the whole clause means 

.
The
semantic contribution can thus be thought of as a linear definite
clause, with the variables X and Y playing the same role as Prolog
variables.

It is worth noting that the form of the semantic contribution of
appointed parallels the type 


which, in
its curried form 



Our approach shares the order-independence of representations of
semantic information by attribute-value matrices
 ,,, while still allowing a well-defined treatment of variable binding and scope.
We do this by distinguishing (1) a language of meanings and (2) a
language for assembling meanings or glue language.

The language of meanings could be that of any appropriate logic, for
 instance Montague's intensional logic .  The glue language, described below, is a fragment of linear logic.  The
semantic contribution of each lexical entry is represented by a
linear-logic formula that can be understood as instructions in the
glue language for combining the meanings of the lexical entry's
syntactic arguments into the meaning of the f-structure headed by the
entry.  Glue formulas may also be contributed by some syntactic
constructions, when properties of a construction as a whole and not
just of its lexical elements are responsible for the interpretation of
the construction; these cases include the semantics of relative
clauses.  We will not discuss construction-specific interpretation
rules in this paper.

 Appendix  gives further details on the syntax of the meaning and glue languages used in this paper.

 As we have just outlined, we
use deduction in linear logic to assign meanings to sentences,
starting from information about their functional structure and about
the semantics of the words they contain.  An approach based on linear
logic, which crucially allows premises to commute, appears to be more
compatible with the shallow and relatively free-form functional
structure than are compositional approaches, which rely on deeply
nested binary-branching immediate dominance relationships.  As noted
above, the use of linear logic as the system for assembling meanings
permits a uniform treatment of a range of natural language phenomena
described by , including modification, completeness
 and coherence, and complex predicate formation.

An important motivation for using linear logic is that it allows us to
to capture directly the intuition that lexical items and phrases each
contribute exactly once to the meaning of a sentence.  As noted by
,
Translation rules in Montague semantics have the property that the
translation of each component of a complex expression occurs exactly
once in the translation of the whole.  ...That is to say, we do
not want the set S [of semantic representations of a phrase] to
contain all meaningful expressions of IL which can be built up
from the elements of S, but only those which use each element exactly
once.

In our terms, the semantic contributions of the constituents
of a sentence are not context-independent assertions that may be used
or not in the derivation of the meaning of the sentence depending on
the course of the derivation. Instead, the semantic contributions are
occurrences of information which are generated and used exactly
once.  For example, the formula 


can be thought of as providing one occurrence of the meaning

associated to the semantic projection 

.
That
meaning must be consumed exactly once (for example, by appointed in
) in the derivation of a meaning of the entire utterance.

It is this ``resource-sensitivity'' of natural language semantics--an
expression is used exactly once in a semantic derivation--that linear
logic can model. The basic insight underlying linear logic is that
logical formulas are resources that are produced and consumed in
the deduction process.  This gives rise to a resource-sensitive notion
of implication, the linear implication :
the formula 


can be thought of as an action that can consume (one
copy of) A to produce (one copy of) B. Thus, the formula 


linearlyentails B.  It does not entail 


(because the deduction consumes A), and it does not entail


(because the linear implication is also
consumed in doing the deduction).  This resource-sensitivity not only
disallows arbitrary duplication of formulas, but also disallows
arbitrary deletion of formulas. Thus the linear multiplicative
conjunction 
is sensitive to the multiplicity of formulas: 


is not equivalent to A (the former has two copies of the
formula A).  For example, the formula 


linearly entails 


(there is still one Aleft over) but does not entail B (there must still be one
A present).  In this way, linear logic checks that a formula is used
once and only once in a deduction, enforcing the requirement that
each component of an utterance contributes exactly once to the
assembly of the utterance's meaning.

To handle quantification, our glue language needs to be only a
fragment of higher-order linear logic, the tensor fragment, that
is closed under conjunction, universal quantification, and implication
(with at most one level of nesting of implication in antecedents).  In
fact, all but the determiner lexical entries are in the first-order
subset of this fragment.  This fragment arises from transferring to
linear logic the ideas underlying the concurrent constraint
programming scheme of . An explicit formulation
for the higher-order version of the linear concurrent constraint
programming scheme is given in
.  A nice tutorial introduction
to linear logic itself may be found in
; see also .

As suggested above, there are interesting connections between our
approach and various systems of categorial syntax and semantics. The
Lambek calculus
 , introduced as a logic of syntactic combination, turns out to be a fragment of noncommutative
multiplicative linear logic.  If permutation is added to Lambek's
system, its left- and right-implication connectives (
and
/) collapse into a single implication connective with behavior
identical to .
This undirected version of the Lambek calculus
was developed by
van Benthem  to account
for the semantic combination possibilities of phrase meanings.

Those systems and related ones
 ,, were developed as calculi of syntactic/semantic types, with propositional
formulas representing syntactic categories or semantic types. Given
the types for the lexical items in a sentence as assumptions, the
sentence is syntactically well-formed in the Lambek calculus if the
type of the sentence can be derived from the assumptions arranged as
an ordered list. Furthermore, the Curry-Howard isomorphism between
 proofs and terms  allows the extraction of a term representing the meaning of the sentence from the proof that the
 sentence is well-formed . However, the Lambek calculus and its variants carry with them a particular view of
syntactic structure that is not obviously compatible with the flatter
f-structures proposed by LFG.

On the other hand, categorial semantics in the undirected Lambek
calculus and other related commutative calculi provides an analysis of
the possibilities of meaning combination independently of the
syntactic realizations of those meanings, but does not provide a
mechanism for relating semantic combination possibilities to
the corresponding syntactic combination possibilities.

In more recent work, multidimensional and labeled deductive systems
 , have been proposed as refinements of the Lambek systems that are able to represent
synchronized derivations involving multiple levels of representation,
for instance a level of head-dependent representations and a level of
syntactic functor-argument representations. However, these systems do
not yet seem able to represent the connection between a flat syntactic
representation in terms of grammatical functions and a
function-argument semantic representation. As far as we can see, the
problem in those systems is that at the type level it is not possible
to express the link between particular syntactic structures
(f-structures in our case) and particular contributions to
meaning. The extraction of meanings from derivations following the
Curry-Howard isomorphism that is standard in categorial systems
demands that the order of syntactic combination coincide with the
order of semantic combination so that functor-argument relations at
the syntactic and semantic level are properly aligned.

Thus, while the ``propositional skeleton'' of an analysis in our
system can be seen as a close relative of the corresponding categorial
semantics derivation in the undirected Lambek calculus, the
first-order part of our analysis (notably the f, g, and h in the
example above) explicitly carries the connection between f-structures
and their contributions to meaning. In this way, we can take advantage
of the principled description of potential meaning combinations of
categorial semantics without losing track of the constraints imposed
by syntax on the possible combinations of those meanings.

Our treatment of quantification, and in particular of quantifier scope
ambiguity and of the interactions between scope and bound anaphora,
follows the approach of Pereira
.  It turns out, however, that
the linear-logic formulation is simpler and easier to justify than
the earlier analysis, which used an intuitionistic type assignment
logic.

The basic idea for the analysis can be seen as a logical
counterpart at the glue level of the standard type
assignment for generalized quantifiers
 . The generalized quantifier meaning of a natural language determiner has the following type, a
function from two properties, the quantifier's restriction and scope,
to a proposition:

  At the semantic glue level, we can understand
that type as follows. For any determiner, if for arbitrary x we can
construct a meaning R x for the quantifier's restriction, and again
for arbitrary x we can construct a meaning S x for the
quantifier's scope, where R and S are properties (functions from
entities to propositions), then we can construct the meaning Q R Sfor the whole sentence containing the determiner, where Q is the
meaning of the determiner.  In the following we
will notate Q R S meaning more perspicuously as 

Q(z,Rz,Sz).

Assume that we have determined the following semantic structures:


for the restriction (a common noun phrase),


for its implicit argument, 


for the scope
of quantification, and 


for the grammatical function
filled by the quantified noun phrase.  Then the foregoing analysis can
be represented in linear logic by the following schematic formula:
  Given the equivalence between 


and 

,
the propositional part of 
parallels the generalized quantifier type .

In addition to providing a semantic type assignment for determiners,
 uses glue language quantification to express how
the meanings of the restriction and scope of quantification are
determined and combined into the meaning of the quantified clause.
The condition 



We first demonstrate how the semantic contribution of a quantified
noun phrase such as every voter is derived.  The following
annotated phrase structure rule is necessary:


This rule states that the determiner Det and noun N each contribute to
the f-structure for the NP.  Lexical specifications ensure that the
noun contributes the  attribute and its value, and the
determiner contributes the  attribute and its value.  The
f-structure for the noun phrase every voter is:
The semantic contributions of common nouns and determiners were
described in the previous section.

Given those entries, the semantic contributions of every and
voter in  are



From these two premises, the semantic contribution for every voter follows:



The propositional part of this contribution corresponds to the
standard type for noun phrase meanings, 

.
Informally, the whole contribution can be read as follows: if by
giving the arbitrary meaning x of type e to the argument position
filled by the noun phrase we can derive the meaning S x of type tfor the semantic structure scope of quantification H, then
S can be the property that the noun phrase meaning requires as its
scope, yielding the meaning 


for
H. The quantified noun phrase can thus be seen as providing
two contributions to an interpretation: locally, a referential
import x, which must be discharged when the scope of quantification
is established; and globally, a quantificational import of type

,
which is applied to the meaning of
the scope of quantification to obtain a quantified proposition.

Before we look at quantifier scope ambiguity and interactions between
scope and bound anaphora, we demonstrate the basic operation of our
proposed representation of the semantic contribution of a determiner.
We use the  following sentence with a single quantifier and no
scope ambiguities:
The premises for the derivation are the semantic
contributions for Bill and convinced together with the
contribution derived above for the quantified noun phrase every
voter:



Giving the name bill-convinced to the formula



we have the derivation:



No derivation of a different formula 


is
possible.  The formula bill-convinced represents the semantics of
the scope of the determiner `every'. The derivable formula 



could at
first sight be considered another possible, but erroneous,
scope. However, the type subscripting of the  relation used in
the determiner lexical entry requires the scope to represent a
dependency of a proposition on an individual, while this formula
represents the dependency of an individual on an individual
(itself). Therefore, it does not provide a valid scope for the
quantifier.

When a sentence contains more than one quantifier, scope ambiguities
are of course possible. In our system, those ambiguities will appear
as alternative successful derivations. We will take as our example the
 sentence 
We can derive semantic contributions
for every candidate and a manager in the way shown in
 Section .  Further derivations proceed from those contributions together with the contribution of appointed:



As of yet, we have not made any commitment about the scopes
of the quantifiers; the 's have not been instantiated.
Scope ambiguities are manifested in two different ways in our system:
through the choice of different semantic structures H,
corresponding to different syntactic choices for where to scope the
quantifier, or through different relative orders of quantifiers that
scope at the same point.  For this example, the second case is
relevant, and we must now make a choice to proceed. The two possible
choices correspond to two equivalent rewritings of appointed:



These two equivalent forms correspond to the two possible
ways of ``currying'' a two-argument function  


as one-argument functions: 





We select a manager to take
narrower scope by using universal instantiation and
transitivity of implication to combine the
first form with a-manager to yield



We have thus the following derivation



of the 


reading of ae.

Alternatively, we could have chosen every candidate to take
narrow scope, by combining the second equivalent form of appointed
with every-candidate to produce:



This gives the derivation



for the 


reading. These are the only two possible
outcomes of the derivation of a meaning for ae, as required. We
have used our implementation to verify that no other outcomes are
possible, since manual verification would be rather laborious.

 Sentence () contains two quantifiers and therefore might be expected to show a two-way ambiguity analogous to the one described
in the previous section:

 Every candidate appointed an admirer of his. 

However, no such ambiguity is found if the pronoun his
is taken to corefer with the subject every candidate. In this
case, only one reading is available, in which an admirer of his
takes narrow scope.  Intuitively, this noun phrase may not take wider
scope than the quantifier every candidate, on which its
restriction depends.

As we will soon see, the lack of a wide scope a reading follows
automatically from our formulation of the semantic contributions of
quantifiers without further stipulation. In Pereira's earlier work on
 deductive interpretation ,, the same result was achieved through constraints on the relative scopes of
glue-level universal quantifiers representing the dependencies between
meanings of clauses and the meanings of their arguments. Here,
although universal quantifiers are used to support the extraction of
properties representing the meanings of the restriction and scope (the
variables R and S in the determiner lexical entries), the blocking
of the unwanted reading follows from the propositional structure of
the glue formulas, specifically the nested linear implications. This
is more satisfactory, since it does not reduce the problem of proper
quantifier scoping in the object language to the same problem in the
metalanguage.

The lexical entry for admirer is:

Here, admirer is a relational noun
taking as its oblique argument a phrase with prepositional marker of, as indicated in the f-structure by the attribute
OF.  The semantic contribution for a relational noun
has, as expected, the same propositional form as the binary relation
type 

:
one argument is the admirer, and the
other argument is the admiree.

We assume that the semantic projection for the antecedent of the
pronoun his has been determined by some separate mechanism and
recorded as the 
attribute of the pronoun's semantic
 projection. The semantic contribution of the pronoun is, then, a formula that consumes the meaning of its antecedent and then
reintroduces that meaning, simultaneously assigning it to its own
semantic projection:

In other words, the semantic contribution of a pronoun
copies the meaning X of its antecedent as the meaning of the pronoun
itself.  Since the left-hand side of the linear implication
``consumes'' the antecedent meaning, it must be reinstated in the
consequent of the implication.

 The f-structure for example () is, then: 

We will begin by illustrating the derivation of the meaning of an
admirer of his, starting from the following premises:



First, we rewrite admirer into the equivalent form



We can use this formula to rewrite the
the second conjunct in the consequent of his,
yielding



In turn, the second conjunct in the consequent of admirer-of-his
matches the first conjunct in the antecedent of a given
appropriate variable substitutions, allowing us to derive



At this point the other formulas available are:



We have thus the meanings of the two quantified noun phrases.  The
antecedent implication of every-candidate has an atomic
conclusion and hence cannot be satisfied by
an-admirer-of-his, which has a conjunctive conclusion.
Therefore, the only possible move is to combine appointed
and an-admirer-of-his. We do this by first
putting appointed in the equivalent form



After universal instantiation of Z with X, this
can be used to rewrite the first conjunct in the consequent of an-admirer-of-his to derive



Universal instantiation of H and S together with modus
ponens with the two conjuncts in the consequent as premises yield



Finally, this formula can be combined with every-candidate
to give the meaning of the whole sentence:



In fact, this is the only derivable conclusion, showing that our
analysis blocks those putative scopings in which variables occur
outside the scope of their binders.

Our approach exploits the f-structure of LFG for syntactic information
needed to guide semantic composition, and also exploits the
resource-sensitive properties of linear logic to express the semantic
composition requirements of natural language.  The use of linear logic
as the glue language in a deductive semantic framework allows a natural
treatment of quantification which automatically gives the right
results for quantifier scope ambiguities and interactions with bound
anaphora.

The analyses discussed here show that our linear-logic encoding of
semantic compositionality captures the interpretation constraints
between quantified noun phrases, their scopes and bound
anaphora. The same basic facts are also accounted for in
other recent treatments of compositionality, in particular categorial
analyses with discontinuous constituency connectives
 .  However, we show elsewhere   that our approach has advantages over those accounts, in that certain available
readings of sentences with intensional verbs and quantified noun
phrases that current categorial analyses cannot derive are readily
produced in our analysis.

Recently,  independently proposed a
multidimensional categorial system with types indexed so as to keep
track of the syntax-semantic connections that we represent with
.
Using proof net techniques due to
 and ,
he maps categorial formulas to first-order clauses similar to our
semantic contributions, except that the formulas arising from
determiners lack the embedded implication. Oehrle's system models
quantifier scope ambiguities in a way similar to ours, but it is not
clear that it can account correctly for the interactions with
anaphora, given the lack of implication embedding in the clausal
representation used.  A full comparison of the two systems is left for
future work.

We thank Johan van Benthem, Bob Carpenter, Jan van Eijck, Angie
Hinrichs, David Israel, Ron Kaplan, John Maxwell, Michael Moortgat,
John Nerbonne, Stanley Peters, Henriette de Swart and an anonymous
reviewer for discussions and comments.  They are not responsible
for any remaining errors, and we doubt that they will endorse all our
analyses and conclusions, but we are sure that the end result is much
improved for their help.

The meaning language is based on Montague's
intensional higher-order logic. In fact, in the present paper we just
use an extensional fragment with the following syntax:



Terms are typed in the usual way;
logical connectives such as every and a are
represented by constants of appropriate type.
For readability, we will often ``uncurry'' 


as

.
Note that we allow variables in the glue
language to range over meaning terms.

The glue language refers to three kinds of terms: meaning terms,
f-structures, and semantic or -structures. f- and
-structures are feature structures in correspondence (through
projections) with constituent structure. Conceptually, feature
structures are just functions which, when applied to attributes (a set
of constants), return constants or other feature structures.  In the
following we let A range over some pre-specified set of attributes.



Glue-language formulas are built up using linear connectives from
atomic formulas of the form 

,
whose intended
interpretation is that the meaning associated with -structure
S is denoted by term M of type .
We omit the type subscript

when it can be determined from context.



Alsina, Alex.
1993.
Predicate Composition: A Theory of Syntactic Function
  Alternations.
Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University.

Barwise, Jon and Robin Cooper.
1981.
Generalized quantifiers and natural language.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 4:159-219.

Bresnan, Joan and Jonni M. Kanerva.
1989.
Locative inversion in Chichewa: A case study of factorization
  in grammar.
Linguistic Inquiry, 20(1):1-50.
Also in E. Wehrli and T. Stowell, eds., Syntax and Semantics 26:
  Syntax and the Lexicon. New York: Academic Press.

Butt, Miriam.
1993.
The Structure of Complex Predicates.
Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University.

Dalrymple, Mary.
1993.
The Syntax of Anaphoric Binding.
Number 36 in CSLI Lecture Notes. Center for the Study of Language and
  Information.

Dalrymple, Mary, John Lamping, and Vijay Saraswat.
1993.
LFG semantics via constraints.
In Proceedings of the Sixth Meeting of the European ACL,
  University of Utrecht, April. European Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics.

Dalrymple, Mary, Angie Hinrichs, John Lamping, and Vijay Saraswat.
1993.
The resource logic of complex predicate interpretation.
In Proceedings of the 1993 Republic of China Computational
  Linguistics Conference (ROCLING), Hsitou National Park, Taiwan, September.
  Computational Linguistics Society of R.O.C.

Dalrymple, Mary, John Lamping, Fernando C. N. Pereira, and Vijay Saraswat.
1994.
Intensional verbs without type-raising or lexical ambiguity.
In Conference on Information-Oriented Approaches to Logic,
  Language and Computation, Moraga, California. Saint Mary's College.
To appear.

Fenstad, Jens Erik, Per-Kristian Halvorsen, Tore Langholm, and Johan van
  Benthem.
1987.
Situations, Language and Logic.
D. Reidel, Dordrecht.

Gamut, L. T. F.
1991.
Logic, Language, and Meaning, volume 2: Intensional Logic and
  Logical Grammar.
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Girard, J.-Y.
1987.
Linear logic.
Theoretical Computer Science, 45:1-102.

Halvorsen, Per-Kristian.
1983.
Semantics for Lexical-Functional Grammar.
Linguistic Inquiry, 14(4):567-615.

Halvorsen, Per-Kristian.
1988.
Situation Semantics and semantic interpretation in
  constraint-based grammars.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Fifth
  Generation Computer Systems, FGCS-88, pages 471-478, Tokyo, Japan,
  November.
Also published as CSLI Technical Report CSLI-TR-101, Stanford
  University, 1987.

Halvorsen, Per-Kristian and Ronald M. Kaplan.
1988.
Projections and semantic description in Lexical-Functional
  Grammar.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Fifth
  Generation Computer Systems, pages 1116-1122, Tokyo, Japan. Institute for
  New Generation Systems.

Hendriks, Herman.
1993.
Studied Flexibility: Categories and Types in Syntax and
  Semantics.
ILLC dissertation series 1993--5, University of Amsterdam,
  Amsterdam, Holland.

Hepple, Mark.
1990.
The Grammar and Processing of Order and Dependency: a Categorial
  Approach.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Edinburgh.

Howard, W.A.
1980.
The formulae-as-types notion of construction.
In J.P. Seldin and J.R. Hindley, editors, To H.B. Curry: Essays
  on Combinatory Logic, Lambda Calculus and Formalism. Academic Press, London,
  England, pages 479-490.

Kaplan, Ronald M.
1987.
Three seductions of computational psycholinguistics.
In Peter Whitelock, Harold Somers, Paul Bennett, Rod Johnson, and
  Mary McGee Wood, editors, Linguistic Theory and Computer Applications.
  Academic Press, London, pages 149-188.

Kaplan, Ronald M. and Joan Bresnan.
1982.
Lexical-Functional Grammar: A formal system for grammatical
  representation.
In Joan Bresnan, editor, The Mental Representation of
  Grammatical Relations. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pages 173-281.

Klein, Ewan and Ivan A. Sag.
1985.
Type-driven translation.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 8:163-201.

Lambek, Joachim.
1958.
The mathematics of sentence structure.
American Mathematical Monthly, 65:154-170.

Miller, Dale A.
1990.
A logic programming language with lambda abstraction, function
  variables and simple unification.
In Peter Schroeder-Heister, editor, Extensions of Logic
  Programming, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence. Springer-Verlag.

Montague, Richard.
1974.
The proper treatment of quantification in ordinary English.
In Richmond H. Thomason, editor, Formal Philosophy. Yale
  University Press, New Haven, Connecticut.

Moortgat, Michael.
1988.
Categorial Investigations: Logical and Linguistic Aspects of the
  Lambek Calculus.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
  October.

Moortgat, Michael.
1992a.
Generalized quantifiers and discontinuous type constructors.
In W. Sijtsma and H. van Horck, editors, Discontinuous
  Constituency. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, Germany.
To appear.

Moortgat, Michael.
1992b.
Labelled deductive systems for categorial theorem proving.
In P. Dekker and M. Stokhof, editors, Proceedings of the Eighth
  Amsterdam Colloquium, pages 403-423, Amsterdam. Institute for Logic,
  Language and Computation.

Morrill, Glyn.
1990.
Intensionality and boundedness.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 13(6):699-726.

Morrill, Glyn V.
1993.
Type Logical Grammar: Categorial Logic of Signs.
Studies in Linguistics and Philosophy. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
  Dordrecht, Holland.
To appear.

Neale, Stephen.
1990.
Descriptions.
The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Oehrle, Richard T.
1993.
String-based categorial type systems.
Workshop ``Structure of Linguistic Inference: Categorial and
  Unification-Based Approaches,'' European Summer School in Logic, Language and
  Information, Lisbon, Portugal.

Pereira, Fernando C. N.
1990.
Categorial semantics and scoping.
Computational Linguistics, 16(1):1-10.

Pereira, Fernando C. N.
1991.
Semantic interpretation as higher-order deduction.
In Jan van Eijck, editor, Logics in AI: European Workshop
  JELIA'90, pages 78-96, Amsterdam, Holland. Springer-Verlag.

Pollard, Carl and Ivan A. Sag.
1987.
Information-Based Syntax and Semantics, Volume I.
Number 13 in CSLI Lecture Notes. Center for the Study of Language and
  Information, Stanford University.

Pollard, Carl and Ivan A. Sag.
1993.
Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar.
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Roorda, Dirk.
1991.
Resource Logics: Proof-theoretical Investigations.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Amsterdam.

Saraswat, Vijay A.
1989.
Concurrent Constraint Programming Languages.
Ph.D. thesis, Carnegie-Mellon University.
Reprinted by MIT Press, Doctoral Dissertation Award and Logic
  Programming Series, 1993.

Saraswat, Vijay A.
1993.
A brief introduction to linear concurrent constraint programming.
Technical report, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center, April.

Saraswat, Vijay A. and Patrick Lincoln.
1992.
Higher-order, linear concurrent constraint programming.
Technical report, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center, August.

Scedrov, Andre.
1993.
A brief guide to linear logic.
In G. Rozenberg and A. Salomaa, editors, Current Trends in
  Theoretical Computer Science, pages 377-394. World Scientific Publishing
  Co.

van Benthem, Johan.
1986.
Categorial grammar and lambda calculus.
In D. Skordev, editor, Mathematical Logic and its Application.
  Plenum Press, New York, New York, pages 39-60.

van Benthem, Johan.
1988.
The Lambek calculus.
In Richard T. Oehrle, Emmon Bach, and Deirdre Wheeler, editors,   Categorial Grammars and Natural Language Structures. D. Reidel, Dordrecht,
  pages 35-68.

van Benthem, Johan.
1991.
Language in Action: Categories, Lambdas and Dynamic Logic.
North-Holland, Amsterdam.

  Xerox Palo
Alto Research Center Technical Report ISTL-NLTT-1993-06-01. To appear
in Quantifiers, Deduction, and Context, ed. Makoto Kanazawa,
Christopher J. Pin, and Henriette de Swart.  Stanford,
California: Center for the Study of Language and Information, 1994.
  Xerox PARC, Palo Alto, California.
  ATT Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey.
  In fact, we believe
that the correct
treatment of the relation between a verb and its arguments requires
the use of mapping principles specifying the relation between
the array of semantic arguments required by a verb and their possible
syntactic realizations
 ,,.  A verb like appoint, for example, might specify that one of its arguments is an agent and the other is a theme.  Mapping principles would then specify
that agents can be realized as subjects and themes as objects.

Here we make the simplifying assumption that the arguments of verbs have
already been linked to syntactic functions and that this linking is
represented in the lexicon, since for the examples we will discuss this
assumption is innocuous.  However, in the case of complex predicates
this assumption produces incorrect results, as shown by
.  Mapping principles are very naturally incorporated
into the framework discussed here; see
 and 
for discussion and illustration.
  ``An f-structure is locally complete if
and only if it contains all the governable grammatical functions that
its predicate governs.  An f-structure is complete if and only
if all its subsidiary f-structures are locally complete. An
f-structure is locally coherent if and only if all the
governable grammatical functions that it contains are governed by a
local predicate.  An f-structure is coherent if and only if
all its subsidiary f-structures are locally coherent.''
 , pages 211-212]. 
  In order to allow for apparent scope ambiguities, we
adopt a scoping analysis of indefinites, as proposed, for example, by
.
  The determination of appropriate values for

requires a more more detailed analysis of other linguistic
constraints on anaphora resolution, which would need further
projections to give information about, for example, discourse
relations and salience.
 discusses in detail LFG analyses of
anaphoric binding.
