
Parallel and distributed computation is expected to be the main stream
of information processing.
In the conventional generation, the rules for composition are given
from the outside and those rules control all the behavior of the
symbols or the objects, for assembling a hierarchical tree
structure. For example, all the linguistic objects, such as words
and phrases must be applied to so-called grammar rules to form
grammatical structures or rational semantic representations, under a
strict controller process. However, this kind of formalization
obviously contradicts the partial / distributed processing that
would be required in parallel architecture in future.

In order to represent grammar rules
distributively, we adopt categorial grammar,
where we can an attach local grammar
rule to each word and phrase. What we aim in this paper is to
propose a paradigm that enables partial / local generation through
decompositions and reorganizations of tentative local structures.

In the following section, we introduce the extended lambda-calculus.
Thereafter we introduce the ChAM model and we reinterpret the model in
terms of natural language processings.  Then we show the model of
membrane interaction model with the example of Japanese
causative sentence that requires drastic change of domination
of cases. Finally we will discuss the future of the model.

CUG (Categorial Unification Grammar)
  is advantageous, compared to other phrase structure grammars, for parallel architecture, because
we can regard categories as functional types and we can represent
grammar rules locally.
This means that we do not need
externally-given grammar rules but those rules reside within each word
or each phrase.
In this section, we
regard categories as polymorphic types and consider the
type calculus. In later sections we denote categories by DAG
 (directed acyclic graph) of PATR grammar . 

We use greek letters, for type schemas. For type constants we use


while for type variables we use 


represents that the object a is of type

 .
If 

and 

are types, then 


is a type.

The purpose of type inference is to infer the type of an object from a
set of objects whose types are known. We presuppose that two type
variables 

and 

are unified with a unifier 

 .
We
use 

for this set of type-known objects. The most important
two rules are as follows:





 The rule () corresponds to   beta-conversion of the ordinary lambda-calculus 
 . 

In this subsection, we introduce two combinators that enable us to
change the order of 
 lambda-conversion, proposed by Steedman
 , as a kind of type change . The ordinary 
 lambda-calculus requires a strict order of
conversion. However, in a concurrent model, this kind of strict
order is a hindrance and contingent conversions are required.

C-combinator changes the order of 
lambda-variables as
follows:

Another requirement for exchanges of the order of 
lambda-conversion
is the following case.
Suppose that we are required to compose all the following typed objects:

In such a case, we need to concatenate g and a first, and then g(a)becomes applicable to f. However, with the help of the following B-combinator:

The 
lambda-variable in g can be shifted beyond the scope of fso that we can concatenate f and g first, and, thus, have a become
 applicable as in Fig. . 

The repeated use of  C- and  B-combinators is still
problematic if we consider implementing it as an actual system
because the termination of processing is not guaranteed.  We have
modeled the process of a partial decomposition as an abstraction of
an argument of the first-order term. If this abstraction occurs
randomly, the process easily falls into a loop.  In order to avoid
this, we assume the unification cost.  If a compound term (a
subtree) were to be decomposed once, the element with the longer
distance should be abstracted first.  We can regard the whole
sentence structure as more grammatical if the sum of these
unification costs is smaller.  We introduce the heuristic costs
 , considering the parallelism between syntactic cases and semantic roles, as follows:

where 


represents a unifier of two DAG's: one's syntactic
case is x and the other's semantic role is y.
k is some constant larger than 1 (k ] 1).

 Chemical Abstract
 Machine (ChAM, for short)  is a paradigm of concurrent lambda-calculus. In this paper, we will
mention our principles on natural language processing with regard to
the ChAM model.

We assume the process of natural language recognition as follows.
Whenever a linguistic object is recognized, it is thrown into the
 solution of ChAM, and acts as a  molecule. Verbs and some
other auxiliary verbs introduces  membranes. These membranes
becomes their scopes for case (or role) domination; namely, each verb
searches for molecules (noun phrases) that are necessary to satisfy
each verb's case (role) frame, within its membrane. In some
occasions, if multiple verbs exist in one sentence, they may conflict
as to which verb dominates which noun phrase. In such a
case, two membranes can interact and can exchange some molecules.

We use 


 for membranes. When a membrane si contains a molecule 

 ,
we
denote as 


 The supporting relation (

 )
can be interpreted as an
inclusion relation (

 )
in this case. Two membranes can
interact when they contact with the notation `

 ', as 


 .
If there is a floating molecule (that which is not yet concatenated
with other molecules) on one side, it can move through the porous
membranes. Valences for concatenation of each molecule are
represented by typed lambda-variables. If one membrane contains only one
composite structure, and it still has surplus valences, we can regard
that whole the membrane has those surplus valences as follows.

Now, we will apply our notions above to the actual problem of sentence
generation.

In the Japanese
language, the causative and the change of voice are realized by
agglutinations of those auxiliary verbs at the tail of current verbs.
These auxiliary verbs as well as ordinary verbs can dominate some
 cases so that these agglutinations may change the whole syntax . Namely the scope of the operation of these auxiliary verbs is
not the operated verb but the whole sentence.
In order to illustrate these role changes, we show the alternation of
 the agent of the main verb in Table   with a short tip to Japanese lexicon.

As an example, we will take the
sentence:
Ken-wa Naomi-ni hon-wo yom-aseru.
(Ken makes Naomi read the book.)
 First, we give DAG's for each lexical items in Fig . 

 The last DAG in Fig.  represents that the verb `yomu (read)' requires two roles `the reader' and `the object to be read', and one optional role `the counter-agent' who hears what the
reader reads. In that figure, `

 ' means that each word is
recognized in the general world however a verb `yomu'
introduced a special membrane s1 as a subworld of W. Each DAG
means a polymorphic type of the lexical item.

Assume that there is a parser that constructs partial tree structures,
as recognizing each word from the head sequentially. Then, when the
first four words are recognized, they can form a complete sentence of
 (). 



Because all the three nouns are adequately concatenated by `read', a
sentential representation is made in the subworld of s1. In
 (),  

 's are the records of unification,
that contain the costs and the original types; they become necessary when they
are backtracked, and in that meaning, those bindings are transitive.

Now, let us recapitulate what has occurred in the membrane s1. There
were four lexical items in the set, and they are duly organized to a
sentence and s1 becomes a singleton.

Then, the problematic final word `-aseru (causative)' arrives;
 its DAG representation is as in Fig. . 

 The DAG in Fig.  requires a sentential form (category S) as an argument, and in
addition, it subcategorizes an item of category N as an agent of the
subsentence.

 Now, the process becomes as in Fig. . 

 All through the process in Fig. , C- and B-combinators are used repeatedly as well as ordinary type inference  () and ().  The second membrane s2 requires an agent role (the variable x' of make). There is a record in

that it bit agent, so that the comparison should be
made between 

and 


 .
However,
because both of 

and 

unifies nominative case and
agent role, the costs are equivalent.  In such a case, linguistic
heuristics will solve the problem. In this case, the agent of makeshould be the nominative of the whole sentence, and the co-agent of
make is the dative of the whole sentence, so that K and N are
bit by newly arrived make. B remains bound to read, because
there is no 
lambda-variable of that type in make.  The process is
 depicted in fig. . 

Introducing free-ordered typed 
lambda-calculus, together with the
notion of unification costs in types, we have shown the structuring of
natural language syntax, by distributively represented types in random
orders.  We adopted a model of Chemical Abstract Machine for the
partial/ concurrent computation model.

Although we introduced the concept of costs and termination was
assured, the efficiency of constructing
a parsing tree would be far slower than sequential processing.
However our objective is not to propose a faster algorithm, but is to
show the possibility of distributed processing of natural languages.
We could show that natural language syntax is self-organizable, in
that each linguistic objects do not need to be poured into `molds',
viz., externally given grammar.

G. Berry and G. Boudol.
The chemical abstract machine.
In 17th Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming
  Languages, pages 81-93, 1990.

H. B. Curry and R. Feys.
Combinatory Logic, volume 1.
North Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 1968.

D. Dowty.
Type Raising, Functional Composition, and Non-constituent
  Conjunction - in Categorial Grammars and Natural Language Structures, pages
  153-197.
D. Reidel, 1988.

J. R. Hindley and Seldin J. P.
Introduction to Combination and 

 -Calculus.
Cambridge University Press, 1986.

S. M. Shieber.
An Introduction to Unification-Based Approaches to Grammar.
CSLI, Stanford University, 1986.

M. Steedman.
Combinators and grammars - in Categorial Grammars and
  Natural Language Structures, pages 417-442.
D. Reidel, 1988.

S. Tojo.
Categorial analysis of sentence generation.
In The Logic Programming Conference (LPC '91), pages 229-238.
  Institute of New Generation Computer (ICOT), 1991.

H. Uszkoreit.
Categorial unification grammars.
In Proc. of COLING '86, pages 187-194, 1986.

T. Gunji.
Japanese Phrase Structure Grammar.
D. Reidel, 1987.



are for 


and for 


 ,
respectively. 


unifies

which appears in both type declarations.


are for 


and for 


 ,
respectively. 


unifies

which appears in both type declarations.
