
The resource-based approach to semantic composition in
Lexical-Functional Grammar (LFG) obtains the interpretation for a
phrase via a logical deduction, beginning with the
 interpretations of its parts as premises .  The resource-sensitive system of linear logic is used to
compute meanings in accordance with relationships manifest in LFG
f-structures.  The properties of the system ensure that
meanings are used exactly once, allowing coherence and completeness conditions on f-structures
  to be maintained. 

However, there are cases where a single constituent appears to
yield more than one contribution to the meaning of an utterance.
This is most obvious in, but is not limited to, sentences
 involving coordination.  In example (), for instance, NAFTA is the object of two different verbs:

Bill supported, and Hillary opposed, NAFTA.
   Since the hallmark of the linear logic approach is to ensure that
f-structure contributions are utilized exactly once in a
derivation, such constructions would at first glance appear to be
problematic for the approach.

We argue that the resource sharing that is commonly manifest in
the treatment of coordination in other approaches is
appropriately handled by exploiting the structure-sharing in LFG
f-structures. We refine our previous analysis to account
for cases where an f-structure is reached by multiple
paths from an enclosing f-structure.

Dalrymple et al.  provides an account of LFG
semantics that represents the meaning of lexical items with
linear logic formulas.  These formulas manipulate basic
assertions of the form 

,
for f-structures f and meaning logic terms M.  Here

is a mapping, the semantic projection, that
relates f-structures to semantic structures. To
distinguish between multiple paths entering an
f-structure, we now take 
to map from sets of
paths in f-structures to semantic structures.  Further,
the paths between f-structures are made available in the
semantic space as resources.  This makes it possible for the
semantic formulas to exploit information about the multiple paths
into an f-structure in order to account for the multiple
uses of the f-structure's semantic contribution.  The
resulting system is sufficiently restricted in cases where other
approaches overgenerate; the very property of
resource-sensitivity for which resource sharing appears to be
problematic actually provides explanatory advantages over systems
that more freely replicate resources during derivation.

 In Section , we review previous approaches to the semantics of coordination and argument sharing, and make note of some
of their drawbacks.  We describe the revised semantic framework in
 Section , and work through several examples of non-constituent coordination (specifically, right-node raising) in
 Section .  We discuss examples involving intensional  verbs in Section . 

Steedman
,
working in the framework of Combinatory Categorial Grammar (CCG),
presents what is probably the most adequate analysis of
non-constituent coordination to date.  As noted by Steedman and
discussed by Oehrle , the addition of the rule
of function composition to the inventory of syntactic rules in
Categorial Grammar enables the formation of constituents with
right-peripheral gaps, providing a basis for a clean treatment of
cases of right node raising as exemplified by sentence
 ().  Such examples are handled by a coordination schema which allows like categories to be conjoined, shown in
 (). 

Coordination: X  CONJ X 


X
  This schema gives rise to various actual rules whose semantics depends
on the number of arguments that the shared material takes.  For the
cases of RNR considered here, the rule has the form shown in
 (). (coordination)
 X/Y:F   CONJ:   X/Y:G  

X/Y:


   The contraction from 


and 


to 


in this rule allows for the single argument to be utilized
twice.

As noted by Hudson , however, not all
examples of RNR involve coordinate structures:

Citizens who support, paraded against politicians who
 oppose, two trade bills.  Obviously, such cases fall outside of the purview of the coordination
schema.  An analysis for this sentence is available in the CCG
framework by the addition of the xsubstitute combinator
(Steedman, p.c.), as defined in Steedman
.
([xsubstitute)
Y/Z:G (X

Y)/Z:F 


X/Z: 


The use of this combinator assimilates cases of noncoordinate RNR to
cases involving parasitic gaps.

 While this approach has some drawbacks, we do not offer a competing analysis of  the syntax of sentences like (   ) here.  Rather, we seek an analysis of RNR (and of resource sharing in general) that is
uniform in the semantics; such a treatment isn't available in CCG
because of its tight integration between syntax and semantics.

Perhaps the most influential and widely-adopted semantic treatment of
coordination is the approach of Partee and Rooth
.
They propose a generalized conjunction scheme in which conjuncts of
the same type can be combined.  As is the case with Steedman's
operators, contraction inherent in the schema allows for a single
shared argument to be distributed as an argument of each conjunct.
Type-lifting is allowed to produce like types when necessary; the
combination of the coordination scheme and type-lifting can have the
effect of `copying' an argument of higher type, such as a quantifier
in the case of coordinated intensional verbs.  They propose a
`processing strategy' requiring that expressions are interpreted at
the lowest possible type, with type-raising taking place only where
necessary.

To illustrate, Partee and Rooth assume that extensional verbs such as
find are entered in the lexicon with basic type 

,
whereas intensional verbs like want, which require a quantifier as an argument, have type 

(ignoring intensionality).  Two
extensional verbs such as find and support are
coordinated at their basic types:

find and support (type 

):



Two intensional verbs such as want and seek are also
coordinated at their basic (higher) types:

want and seek (type 

):



The argument to this expression is a quantified NP.  When an
intensional and an extensional verb are coordinated, the extensional
verb must be type-raised to promote it to the type of the intensional
verb:

want and find (type 

):



Again, this leads to the desired result.  However, an unwelcome
consequence of this approach, which appears to have gone unnoticed in
the literature, arises in cases in which more than two verbs are
conjoined.  If an intensional verb is coordinated with more than one
extensional verb, a copy of the quantifier will be
distributed to each verb in the coordinate structure.  For instance,
 in (), two extensional verbs and an intensional verb are coordinated.
  want, find, and support: 



Application of this expression to a quantifier results in two
quantifiers being scoped separately over the extensional verbs.  This
is the wrong result; in a sentence such as Hillary wanted, found,
and supported two candidates, the desired result is where one
quantifier scopes over both extensional verbs (that is, Hillary found and
supported the same two candidates), just as in the case where all the
verbs are extensional.  Further, there does not seem to be an obvious
way to modify the Partee and Rooth proposal so as to produce the
correct result, the problem being that the ability to copy
quantifiers inherent in their schema is too unrestricted.

A second problem with the account is that, as with Steedman's
coordination schema, Partee and Rooth's type-raising strategy only
applies to coordinate structures.  However, the need to type-raise
extends to cases not involving coordination, as in sentence
 (). 

 Citizens who seek, paraded against politicians who have, a decent health insurance policy.

We will present an analysis that preserves the intuition underlying Partee
and Rooth's processing strategy, but that predicts and generates the
 correct reading for cases such as ().  Furthermore, the account applies equally to examples not involving coordination, as is
 the case in sentence (). 

LFG assumes two syntactic levels of representation: constituent
 structure (c-structure) encodes phrasal dominance and precedence relations, and functional structure (f-structure)
encodes syntactic predicate-argument structure.  The f-structure for
 sentence () is given in (): 

Lexical entries specify syntactic constraints on f-structures as well
as semantic information:

Semantic information is expressed in (1) a meaning
language and (2) a language for assembling meanings, or glue
language.  The meaning language could be that of any appropriate
logic; for present purposes, higher-order logic will suffice.
Expressions of the meaning language (such as Bill) appear on the
right side of the meaning relation .

The glue language is the tensor fragment of linear
 logic . The semantic contribution of each lexical entry, which we will refer to as a meaning constructor,
is a linear-logic formula consisting of instructions in the glue
language for combining the meanings of the lexical entry's syntactic
arguments to obtain the meaning of the f-structure headed by the
entry.  For instance, the meaning constructor for the verb supported is a glue language formula paraphrasable as: ``If my 
SUBJ means X and ()
my  OBJ means Y, then
(

)
my sentence means 

''.

In the system described in Dalrymple et al. ,
the 
relation associates expressions in the meaning
language with f-structures.  As a result, each
f-structure contributed a single meaning constructor as a
resource to be used in a derivation.  Because linear logic does
not have any form of logical contraction (as is inherent in the
approaches discussed earlier), cases where resources are shared
appear to be problematic in this framework.  Intuitively,
however, the need for the multiple use of an f-structure
meaning results not from the appearance of a particular lexical
item (e.g., a conjunction) or a particular syntactic construction
(e.g., parasitic gap constructions), but instead results from
multiple paths to it from within the f-structure that
contains it, where structure sharing is motivated on syntactic
grounds.  We therefore revise the earlier framework to model what
we will term occurrences of f-structures as
resources explicitly in the logic.

F-structures can mathematically be regarded as (finite)
functions from a set of attributes to a set of atomic values,
semantic forms and (recursively) f-structures. We will
identify an occurrence of an f-structure with a path (from
the root) to that occurrence; sets of occurrences of an
f-structure can therefore be identified with path sets in
the f-structure. We take, then, the domain of the projection to be path sets in the root f-structure.  Only
those path sets S are considered which satisfy the property
that the extensions of each path in S are identical.  Therefore
the f-structure reached by each of these paths is
identical. Hence from a path set S, we can read off an
f-structure Sf.  In the examples discussed in Dalrymple et
al.  there is a one-to-one correspondence
between the set of path sets S and the set of
f-structures Sf picked out by such path sets, so the
two methods yield the same predictions for those cases.

Relations between path sets are represented explicitly as
resources in the logic by R-relations.  R-relations
are represented as three-place predicates of the form


which indicate that (the path set) Gappears at the end of a path P (of length 1) extending (the
path set) F. That is, the f-structure  Gf appears at
the end of the singleton path P in the f-structure
Ff.  For example, the f-structure given in
 () results in two R-relations: 



Because f and g represent path sets entering an
f-structure that they label, R-relation (i)
indicates that the set of paths 



First we consider the derivation of the basic case of right-node raising
 (RNR) illustrated in sentence (), repeated in  (). 

 ) is shown in  (   ). 

  

The meaning constructors contributed by the lexical items are as
follows:



Here, we treat and as a binary relation.  This suffices for this
example, but in general we will have to allow for cases where more
than two constituents are conjoined.  Therefore, a second meaning
constructor and2 is also contributed by the appearance of and, prefixed with the linear logic operator `!', so that it may be
used as many times as necessary (and possibly not at all, as is the
case in this example).

The R-relations resulting from the feature-value relationships
 manifest in the f-structure in () are: 



There are several equivalent derivation orders; here we step through
 one.  Using the meanings for Bill, supported, Hillary, and opposed, R-relations (iii) and (v), and
Axiom I, we can derive meanings for Bill supported and
 Hillary opposed in the fashion described in Section : 



We combine the antecedents and consequents of the foregoing formulae to yield:



Consuming the meaning of and and R-relations (i) and (ii), and
using Axiom I, we derive:



Using Axiom I and  R-relations (iv) and (vi), the following
implication can be derived:



Using these last two formulae, by transitivity we obtain:



Finally, consuming the contribution of NAFTA, by universal
instantiation and modus
ponens we obtain a meaning for the whole sentence:



At this stage, all accountable resources have been consumed, and
the deduction is complete.

 We now consider sentence (), where a quantified NP is shared. 

  

Partee and Rooth  observe,
and we agree, that the quantifier in such cases only scopes once,
resulting in the reading where Bill supported and Hillary opposed the
 same two bills.  Our analysis predicts this fact in the same way as Partee and Rooth's analysis
does.

The meanings contributed by the lexical items and f-structure
dependencies are the same as in the previous example, except for that
of the object NP.  Following Dalrymple et
al. , the meaning derived using the
contributions from an f-structure h for two trade bills
is:



The derivation is just as before, up until the final step, where we
have derived the formula labeled
bill-supported-and-hillary-opposed2.  This formula matches the
antecedent of the quantified NP meaning, so by universal instantiation
and modus ponens we derive:



With this derivation, there is only one quantifier meaning which
scopes over the meaning of the coordinated material.  A result where
the quantifier meaning appears twice, scoping over each conjunct
separately, is not available with the rules we have given thus far; we
 return to this point in Section . 

The analysis readily extends to cases of noncoordinate RNR such as
 example (), repeated as example  (). 
  In our analysis, the f-structure for two trade bills is
resource-shared as the object of the two verbs, just as it is in the
coordinated case.

Space limitations preclude our going through the derivation; however,
it is straightforward given the semantic contributions of the lexical
items and R-relations.  The fact that there is no coordination
involved has no bearing on the result, since the semantics of
resource-sharing is distinct from that of coordination in our
analysis.  As previously noted, this separation is not possible in
CCG because of the tight integration between syntax
and semantics.  In LFG, the syntax/semantics interface is more loosely
coupled, affording the flexibility to handle coordinated and
non-coordinated cases of RNR uniformly in the semantics.  This also
allows for our semantics of coordination not to require schemas nor
entities of polymorphic type; our meaning of and is type 

.

We now return to consider cases involving intensional verbs.
 The preferred reading for sentence (), in which only one quantifier scopes over the two extensional predicates, is
shown below:

  



 The f-structure for example () is given in  (). 

The meaning constructors for the lexical items are given in Figure
 .  Recall that a second meaning constructor and2 is introduced by and in order to handle cases where there are more
than two conjuncts; this contribution will be used once in the
 derivation of the meaning for sentence (). The following R-relations result from the f-structural
relationships:



Following the analysis given in Dalrymple et al. , the lexical entry for want takes a
quantified NP as an argument.  This requires that the quantified NP
meaning be duplicated, since otherwise no readings result.  We provide
a special rule for duplicating quantified NPs when necessary:


In the interest of space, again we only show a few steps of the derivation.
Combining the meanings for Hillary, found, supported, and and,
Axiom I, and R-relations (ii), (iii),
(v), (vi), (viii), and (ix), we can derive:



We duplicate the meaning of two candidates using QNP
Duplication, and combine one
copy with the foregoing formula to yield:



We then combine the other meaning of two candidates with the
meanings of Hillary and
wanted, and using Axiom I and R-relations (i), (iv), and
(vii) we obtain:



Finally, using and2 with the two foregoing formulae, we deduce
the desired result:



We can now specify a Partee and Rooth style processing strategy, which
is to prefer readings which require the least use of QNP duplication.
This strategy predicts the readings generated for the examples in
 Section .  It also predicts the desired reading for  sentence (), since that reading requires two quantifiers.  While the reading generated by Partee and Rooth is
derivable, it requires three quantifiers and thus uses QNP duplication
twice, which is less preferred than the reading requiring two
quantifiers which uses QNP duplication once.  Also, it allows some
flexibility in cases where pragmatics strongly suggests that
quantifiers are copied and distributed for multiple extensional verbs;
unlike the Partee and Rooth account, this would apply equally to the
case where there are also intensional verbs and the case where there
are not.  Finally, our account readily applies to cases of intensional
 verbs without coordination as in example (), since it applies more generally to cases of resource sharing.

We have given an account of resource sharing in the syntax/semantics
interface of LFG.  The multiple use of semantic contributions results
from viewing dependencies in f-structures as resources; in this way
the one-to-one correspondence between f-structure relations and
meanings is maintained.  The resulting account does not suffer from
overgeneration inherent in other approaches, and applies equally to
cases of resource sharing that do not involve coordination.
Furthermore, it lends itself readily to an extension for the
intensional verb case that has advantages over the widely-assumed
account of Partee and Rooth .

Here we have separated the issue of arriving at the appropriate
f-structure in the syntax from the issue of deriving the correct
semantics from the f-structure.  We have argued that this is the
correct distinction to make, and have given a treatment of the second
issue.  A treatment of the first issue will be articulated in a future
forum.

We would like to thank Sam Bayer, John Maxwell, Fernando Pereira, Dick
Oehrle, Stuart Shieber, and especially Ron Kaplan for helpful
discussion and comments.  The first author was supported in part by
National Science Foundation Grant IRI-9009018, National Science
Foundation Grant IRI-9350192, and a grant from the Xerox Corporation.

Mary Dalrymple, Angie Hinrichs, John Lamping, and Vijay Saraswat.
1993a.
The resource logic of complex predicate interpretation.
In Proceedings of the 1993 Republic of China Computational
  Linguistics Conference (ROCLING), Hsitou National Park, Taiwan, September.
  Computational Linguistics Society of R.O.C.

Mary Dalrymple, John Lamping, and Vijay Saraswat.
1993b.
LFG semantics via constraints.
In Proceedings of the Sixth Meeting of the European ACL,
  University of Utrecht, April. European Chapter of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics.

Mary Dalrymple, John Lamping, Fernando C. N. Pereira, and Vijay Saraswat.
1994a.
A deductive account of quantification in LFG.
In Makoto Kanazawa, Christopher J. Pin, and Henriette
  de Swart, editors, Quantifiers, Deduction, and Context. Center for the
  Study of Language and Information, Stanford, California.
To appear.

Mary Dalrymple, John Lamping, Fernando C. N. Pereira, and Vijay Saraswat.
1994b.
Intensional verbs without type-raising or lexical ambiguity.
In Conference on Information-Oriented Approaches to Logic,
  Language and Computation, Moraga, California. Saint Mary's College.

J.-Y. Girard.
1987.
Linear logic.
Theoretical Computer Science, 45:1-102.

Herman Hendriks.
1993.
Studied Flexibility: Categories and Types in Syntax and
  Semantics.
ILLC dissertation series 1993--5, University of Amsterdam,
  Amsterdam, Holland.

Richard A Hudson.
1976.
Conjunction reduction, gapping, and right-node raising.
Language, 52(3):535-562.

Ronald M. Kaplan and Joan Bresnan.
1982.
Lexical-Functional Grammar: A formal system for grammatical
  representation.
In Joan Bresnan, editor, The Mental Representation of
  Grammatical Relations, pages 173-281. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Richard T. Oehrle.
1990.
Categorial frameworks, coordination, and extraction.
In Aaron Halpern, editor, Proceedings of the Ninth West Coast
  Conference on Formal Linguistics, pages 411-425.

Barbara Partee and Mats Rooth.
1983.
Generalized conjunction and type ambiguity.
In Bauerle, Schwarze, and von Stechow, editors, Meaning, Use,
  and Interpretation of Language, pages 361-383. de Gruyter.

Mark J. Steedman.
1985.
Dependency and coordination in the grammar of Dutch and English.
Language, 61:523-568.

Mark J. Steedman.
1987.
Combinatory grammars and parasitic gaps.
Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 5:403-439.

Mark J. Steedman.
1989.
Constituency and coordination in a combinatory grammar.
In Mark Baltin and Anthony Kroch, editors, Alternative
  Conceptions of Phrase Structure, pages 201-231. Chicago University Press.

Mark J. Steedman.
1990.
Gapping as constituent coordination.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 13(2):207-263.

   kehler@das.harvard.edu
   {dalrymple,lamping,saraswat}@parc.xerox.com
  We find two problems
with the approach as it stands.  First, the intuition that one gap is
 `parasitic' upon the other in cases like () is not strong, whereas the CCG analysis suggests an asymmetry between the two
gaps.  Second, the combinator appears to cause overgeneration.  While
 it allows sentence (), it also allows sentence (b), where two trade bills is analyzed as the object of both
verbs:
[(b)]*Politicians who oppose, paraded
against, two trade bills.
  For discussion of c-structure
and its relation to f-structure, see, for example, Kaplan and Bresnan
.
  We
treat the  CONJ features as unordered, as they are in the
f-structure set.
  In the interest of space, we will skip some intermediate
steps in the derivation.
  We therefore disagree with Hendricks
, who claims that such sentences
readily allow a reading involving four trade bills.
