
Semitic is known amongst computational linguists, in particular
computational morphologists, for its highly inflexional morphology.
Its root-and-pattern phenomenon not only poses difficulties for a
morphological system, but also makes error detection a difficult
task. This paper aims at presenting a morphographemic model which can
cope with both issues.

The following convention has been adopted. Morphemes are represented
in braces, { }, surface (phonological) forms in solidi, / /, and
orthographic strings in acute brackets, 
.
In examples of
grammars, variables begin with a capital letter. Cs denote consonants,
Vs denote vowels and a bar denotes complement. An asterisk, *,
indicates ill-formed strings.

The difficulties in morphological analysis and error detection in
Semitic arise from the following facts:


A Semitic stem consists of a 
         and a ,
arranged according to a .
For example, Arabic /kuttib/ `caused to
         write - perfect passive' is composed from the root morpheme
         {ktb} `notion of writing' and the vowel melody morpheme
         {ui} `perfect passive'; the two are arranged according to
         the pattern morpheme {CVCCVC} `causative'. This phenomenon
          is analysed by  along the lines of           autosegmental phonology . The analysis           appears in (1).   



Orthographically, Semitic texts appear in
         three forms: (i) 
do not incorporate
          any short vowels but , e.g. Arabic ktb for /katab/,
         /kutib/ and /kutub/, but kaatb
for /kaatab/ and
         /kaatib/; (ii) 
incorporate
         some short vowels to clarify ambiguity, e.g. kutb
for /kutib/ to distinguish it from /katab/; and (iii) 
incorporate full vocalisation, e.g. 

.


Semitic languages employ a
         large number of diacritics to represent 
          short vowels, doubled letters, and nunation. Most editors allow the user to enter          such diacritics above and below letters. To speed data entry,
         the user usually enters the base characters (say a paragraph) and
         then goes back and enters the diacritics. A common mistake is
         to place the cursor one extra position to the left when
         entering diacritics. This results in the vowels being shifted
         one position, e.g. *wkatubi
instead of 
wakutib.


The quality of the perfect and imperfect
         vowels of the basic forms of the Semitic verbs are
         idiosyncratic. For example, the Syriac root {ktb} takes
         the perfect vowel ,
e.g. /ktab/, while the root
         {nt} takes the vowel ,
e.g. /net/. It is
         common among learners to make mistakes such as */kteb/ or
         */nat/.


A consonantal segment may be
         omitted from the 
surface form, but maintained
         in the 
surface from. For example, Syriac
         
 



The application of a morphographemic
          rule may have constraints as on which lexical morphemes it
          may or may not apply. For example, the glottal stop []
          at the end of a stem may become [w] when followed by the
          relative adjective morpheme {iyy}, as in Arabic
          /samaa+iyy/ 


/samaawiyy/ `heavenly', but
          /hawaa+iyy/ 


/hawaaiyy/ `of
          air'. 


In broken plurals, diminutives
          and deverbal nouns, the user may enter a morphologically
          sound, but morphosyntactically ill-formed word. We shall
          discuss this in more detail in
           section . 


To the above, one adds language-independent issues in spell checking
such as the four Damerau transformations: omission, insertion,
 transposition and substitution . 

This section presents a morphographemic model which handles error
 detection in non-linear strings. Subsection  presents  the formalism used, and subsection  describes the model. 

In order to handle the non-linear phenomenon of Arabic, our model
 adopts the two-level formalism presented by , with the  multi tape extensions in . Their formalism appears in (2).

The special symbol * is a wildcard matching any context, with no
length restrictions.  The operator 


caters for obligatory
rules. A lexical string maps to a surface string iff they can be
partitioned into pairs of lexical-surface subsequences, where each
pair is licenced by a 


or 


rule, and no
partition violates a 


rule. In the multi-tape
version, lexical expressions (i.e.  LLC,  LEX and  RLC)
are -tuple of regular expressions of the form (x1, x2,
,
xn): the th expression refers to symbols on the
th tape; a nill slot is indicated by 

 . Another extension is giving  LLC the ability to contain ellipsis, 
, which indicates the (optional)
omission from  LLC of tuples, provided that the tuples to the
left of 
are the first to appear on the left of  LEX.

In our morphographemic model, we add a similar formalism for
expressing error rules (3).


The error rules capture the correspondence between the error surface
and the correct surface, given the surrounding partition into surface
and lexical contexts.  They happily utilise the multi-tape format and
integrate seamlessly into morphological analysis.  PLC and PRC above
are the left and right contexts of both the lexical and (correct)
surface levels.  Only the 


is used (error is not obligatory).

Morphological analysis is first called with the assumption that
the word is free of errors.  If this fails, analysis is attempted
again without the `no error' restriction.
The error rules are then considered when ordinary
morphological rules fail.  If no error rules succeed, or lead to
a successful partition of the word, analysis backtracks to try the
error rules at successively earlier points in the word.

For purposes of simplicity and because on the whole is it likely that
 words will contain no more than one error ,, normal `no error' analysis
usually resumes if an error rule succeeds.  The exception occurs with
 a vowel shift error ().  If this error rule succeeds, an expectation of further shifted vowels is set up, but no other error
rule is allowed in the subsequent partitions.  For this reason rules
are marked as to whether they can occur more than once.

Once an error rule is selected, the corrected surface is substituted for
the error surface, and normal analysis continues - at the same position.
The substituted surface may be in the form of a variable, which
is then ground by the normal analysis sequence of lexical matching over
the lexicon tree. In this way only lexical words are considered, as
the variable letter can only be instantiated to letters branching out
from the current position on the lexicon tree.  Normal prolog backtracking
to explore alternative rules/lexical branches applies throughout.

We demonstrate our model on the Arabic verbal stems shown in (4)
 . Verbs are classified according to their 
(M): there are 15
trilateral measures and 4 quadrilateral ones.  Moving horizontally
across the table, one notices a change in vowel melody (active {a},
passive {ui}); everything else remains invariant.  Moving
vertically, a change in canonical pattern occurs; everything else
remains invariant.

 Subsection  presents a simple two-level grammar which  describes the above data. Subsection  presents error checking.



The lexical level maintains three lexical tapes
 ,: pattern tape, root tape and vocalism tape; each tape scans a lexical tree. Examples of pattern morphemes
are: {c1v1c2v1c3} (M 1),
{c1c2v1nc3v2c4} (M Q3). The root morphemes
are {ktb} and {}, and the vocalism morphemes are {a}
(active) and {ui} (passive).

The following two-level grammar handles the above data. Each lexical
expression is a triple; lexical expressions with one symbol assume


on the remaining positions.


(4) gives three general rules: R0
allows any character on the first lexical tape to surface,
e.g. infixes, prefixes and suffixes.  R1 states that any P {c1, c2, c3, c4} on the first (pattern) tape and C on
the second (root) tape with no transition on the third (vocalism) tape
corresponds to C on the surface tape; this rule sanctions consonants.
Similarly, R2 states that any P 
{v1, v2} on the pattern
tape and V on vocalism tape with no transition on the root tape
corresponds to V on the surface tape; this rule sanctions vowels.

(4) gives two boundary rules: R3 is used for non-stem
morphemes, e.g. prefixes and suffixes. R4 applies to stem morphemes
reading three boundary symbols simultaneously; this marks the end of a
stem. Notice that LLC ensures that the right boundary rule is invoked
at the right time.

Before embarking on the rest of the rules, an illustrated example
seems in order. The derivation of  (M Q5,
passive), from the three morphemes
{c1c2v1nc3v2c4}, {} and {ui}, and the
suffix {a} `3rd person' is illustrated in (5).

The numbers between the surface tape and the lexical tapes indicate the rules
which sanction the moves.

Resuming the description of the grammar, (5) presents spreading
rules. Notice the use of ellipsis to indicate that there can be tuples
separating  LEX and LLC, as far as the tuples in LLC are the nearest ones
to  LEX. R5 sanctions the spreading (and gemination) of consonants. R6
sanctions the spreading of the first vowel. Spreading examples appear in
(6).


The following rules allow for the different possible orthographic
vocalisations in Semitic texts:  

where 
= (v1,

,V)(Pc1,C1,

)
and

= (Pc2,C2,

).

R7 and R8 allow the optional deletion of short vowels in non-stem and
stem morphemes, respectively; note that the lexical contexts make sure
that long vowels are not deleted. R9 allows the optional deletion of a
short vowel what is the cause of spreading.
For example the rules sanction both /katab/ (M 1, active) and /kutib/
(M 1, passive) as interpretations of ktb
as showin in
(7).

Below are outlined error rules resulting from peculiarly Semitic
problems.  Error rules can also be constructed in a similar vein to
deal with typographical Damerau error (which also take care of the
issue of wrong vocalisms).



A vowel shift error rule will be tried with a partition on a (short)
vowel which is not an expected (lexical) vowel at that position.
Short vowels can legitimately be omitted from an orthographic representation
- it is this fact which contributes to the problem of vowel shifts.
A vowel is considered shifted if the same vowel has been omitted
earlier in the word.  The rule deletes the vowel from the surface. Hence
in the next pass of (normal) analysis, the partition is analysed as
a legitimate omission of the 
vowel.  This prepares for the next
shifted vowel to be treated in exactly the same way as the first. The
expectation of this reapplication is allowed for in reap = y.



In the rules above, `X' is the shifted vowel.  It is deleted from the surface.
The partition contextual tuples consist of  [RULE NAME, SURF, LEX].  The
 LEX element is a tuple itself of  [PATTERN, ROOT, VOCALISM].
In E0 the shifted vowel was analysed earlier as an omitted stem vowel
(om_stmv),
whereas in E1 it was analysed earlier as an omitted spread vowel (om_sprv).
The surface/lexical restrictions in the contexts could be written out
in more detail, but both rules make use of the fact that those
contexts are analysed by other partitions, which check that they meet the
conditions for an omitted stem vowel or omitted spread vowel.

For example, *
will be interpreted as .
The `E0's on the rule number line indicate where the vowel shift rule was
applied to replace an error surface vowel with 

.
The error surface vowels
are written in italics.



Problems resulting from phonetic syncopation can be treated as
accidental omission of a consonant, e.g.  *,
.


Although the error probably results from a different fault, a deleted
long vowel can be treated in the same way as a deleted consonant.
With current transcription practice, long vowels are commonly written
as two characters - they are possibly better represented as a single,
distinct character.



The form *tuktib
can be interpreted as either tukuttib
with a deleted consonant (geminated `t') or tukuutib
with a deleted long vowel.



One type of morphographemic error is that consonant substitution may
not take place before appending a suffix.  For example /samaa/
`heaven' + {iyy} `relative adjective' surfaces as samaawiyy,
where 


w in the given context. A common
mistake is to write it as *sammaiyy.



The `glottal_change' rule would be a normal morphological spelling change
rule, incorporating contextual constraints (e.g. for the morpheme boundary)
as necessary.

This section deals with morphosyntactic errors which are independent
of the two-level analysis. The data described below was obtained from
 Daniel Ponsford (personal communication), based on . 

Recall that a Semitic stems consists of a root morpheme and a
vocalism morpheme arranged according to a canonical pattern morpheme.
As each root does not occur in all vocalisms and patterns, each
lexical entry is associated with a feature structure which indicates

the possible patterns and vocalisms for a particular
root. Consider the nominal data in (8).

Patterns marked with * are morphologically plausible, but do not occur
lexically with the cited nouns. A common mistake is to choose the wrong
pattern.

In such a case, the two-level model succeeds in finding two-level
analyses of the word in question, but fails when parsing the word
morphosyntactically: at this stage, the parser is passed a root,
vocalism and pattern whose feature structures do not unify.

Usually this feature-clash situation creates the problem of which
 constituent to give preference to .  Here the vocalism indicates the inflection (e.g. broken plural) and the preferance of
vocalism pattern for that type of inflection belongs to the root.  For
example *kidaaswould be analysed as root {kds} with
a broken plural vocalism.  The pattern type of the vocalism clashes
with the broken plural pattern that the root expects.  To correct, the
morphological analyser is executed in generation mode to generate the
broken plural form of {kds} in the normal way.

The same procedure can be applied on diminutive and deverbal nouns.

The model presented corrects errors resulting from combining
nonconcatenative strings as well as more standard morphological or
spelling errors.  It covers Semitic errors relating to vocalisation,
diacritics,
phonetic syncopation and morphographemic idiosyncrasies.  Morphosyntactic
issues of broken plurals, diminutives and deverbal nouns can be handled
by a complementary correction strategy which also depends on morphological
analysis.

Other than the economic factor, an important advantage of combining
morphological analysis and error detection/correction is the way the lexical
tree associated with the analysis can be used to determine correction
possibilities.
The morphological analysis proceeds by selecting rules that
hypothesise lexical strings for a given surface string. The rules are
accepted/rejected by checking that the lexical string(s) can extend
along the lexical tree(s) from the current position(s).  Variables
introduced by error rules into the surface string are then instantiated by
associating surface with lexical, and matching lexical strings to
the lexicon tree(s).  The system is unable to consider correction
characters that would be lexical impossibilities.

The authors would like to thank their supervisor Dr Stephen
Pulman. Thanks to Daniel Ponsford for providing data on the broken
plural and Nuha Adly Atteya for discussing Arabic examples.

Abduh, D. (1990).

[Difficulties in automatic spell
  checking of Arabic].
In .
In Arabic.

Damerau, F. (1964).
A technique for computer detection and correction of spelling errors.
,
7(3):171-6.

Goldsmith, J. (1976).
.
PhD thesis, MIT.
Published as ,
Oxford 1990.

Kay, M. (1987).
Nonconcatenative finite-state morphology.
In ,
pages 2-10.

Kiraz, G.
Computational analyses of Arabic morphology.
Forthcoming in Narayanan, A. and Ditters, E., editors, .
Intellect. Article 
in 
archive.

Kiraz, G. (1994).
Multi-tape two-level morphology: a case study in Semitic non-linear
  morphology.
In ,
volume 1, pages 180-6.

Kiraz, G. and Grimley-Evans, E. (1995).
Compilation of n:1 two-level rules into finite state automata.
Manuscript.

Langer, H. (1990).
Syntactic normalization of spontaneous speech.
In ,
pages 180-3.

McCarthy, J. (1981).
A prosodic theory of nonconcatenative morphology.
,
12(3):373-418.

Pollock, J. and Zamora, A. (1983).
Collection and characterization of spelling errors in scientific and
  scholarly text.
,
  34(1):51-8.

Pulman, S. and Hepple, M. (1993).
A feature-based formalism for two-level phonology: a description and
  implementation.
,
7:333-58.

Wehr, H. (1971).
.
Spoken Language Services, Ithaca.

  
  
  We have used the CV model
         to describe pattern morphemes instead of prosodic terms
         because of its familiarity in the computational linguistics
         literature. For the use of moraic and affixational models in
         handling Arabic morphology computationally, see
          . 
  `Mothers of reading', these are
         consonantal letters which play the role of long vowels, and
         are represented in the pattern morpheme by VV (e.g. /aa/,
         /uu/, /ii/).  
cannot be omitted from
         the orthographic string.
  When
         indefinite, nouns and adjectives end in a 
[n]
         which is represented in the 
form by
         special diacritics.
  For other issues with respect to
           syntactic dependencies, see . 
  Our
implementation interprets rules directly; hence, we allow 

.
If
the rules were to be compiled into automata, a genuine symbol, e.g. 0,
must be used. For the compilation of our formalism into automata, see
 . 
