
During the last few years, the previously separate fields of speech
and natural language processing have moved much closer together, and
it is now common to see integrated systems containing components for
both speech recognition and language processing. An immediate problem
is the nature of the interface between the two. A popular solution has
 been the N-best list e.g. ; for some N, the speech recognizer hands the language processor the N utterance
hypotheses it considers most plausible. The recognizer chooses the
hypotheses on the basis of the acoustic information in the input
signal and, usually, a simple language model such as a bigram grammar.
The language processor brings more sophisticated linguistic knowledge
sources to bear, typically some form of syntactic and/or semantic
analysis, and uses them to choose the most plausible member of the
N-best list. We will call an algorithm that selects a member of the
N-best list a preference method. The most common preference
method is to select the highest member of the list that receives a
valid semantic analysis. We will refer to this as the
``highest-in-coverage'' method.  Intuitively, highest-in-coverage
seems a promising idea. However, practical experience shows that it is
surprisingly hard to use it to extract concrete gains. For example, a
 recent paper  concluded that the highest-in-coverage candidate was in terms of the word error rate only very marginally
better than the one the recognizer considered best. In view of the
considerable computational overhead required to perform linguistic
analysis on a large number of speech hypotheses, its worth is dubious.

In this paper, we will describe a general strategy for constructing a
preference method as a near-optimal combination of a number of different
knowledge sources. By a ``knowledge source'', we will mean any
well-defined procedure which associates some potentially meaningful
piece of information with a given utterance hypothesis H. Some examples
of knowledge sources are

The plausibility score originally assigned to H by the
recognizer.

The sets of surface unigrams, bigrams and trigrams present in H.

Whether or not H receives a well-formed syntactic/semantic
analysis.

If so, properties of that analysis.



The methods described here were tested on a 1001-utterance unseen
subset of the ATIS corpus; speech recognition was performed using the
 DECIPHER (TM) recognizer ,, and linguistic analysis by a version of the Core Language Engine (CLE;
 ).  For 10-best hypothesis lists, the best method yielded a proportional reductions of 13% in the word error rate, and 11% in
the sentence error rate; if sentence error was scored in the context
of the task, the reduction was about 21%.  By contrast, the
corresponding figures for the highest-in-coverage method were a 7%
reduction in word error rate, a 5% reduction in sentence error rate
(strictly measured) and a 12% reduction in the sentence error rate in
the context of the task.

The rest of the paper is laid out as follows.  In
 Section , we describe a method that allows
different knowledge sources to be merged into a near-optimal
combination.
 Section  describes the
experimental results in more detail.
 Section  concludes.

This section describes how different knowledge sources (KSs) can be
combined. We start by assuming the existence of a training corpus of
N-best lists produced by the recognizer, each list tagged with a
``reference sentence'' that determines which (if any) of the
hypotheses in it was correct. We analyse each hypothesis H in the
corpus using a set of possible KSs, each of which associates some form
of information with H.  Information can be of two different kinds.
Some KSs may directly produce a number which can be viewed as a
measure of H's plausibility.  Typical examples are the score which
the recognizer assigned to H, and the score for whether or not Hreceived a linguistic analysis (1 or 0 respectively). More commonly,
however, the KS will produce a list of one or more ``linguistic
items'' associated with H, for example surface N-grams in H or the
grammar rules occurring in the best linguistic analysis of H, if
there was one. A given linguistic item L is associated with a
numerical score through a ``discrimination function'' (one function
for each type of linguistic item), that summarizes the relative
frequencies of occurrence of L in correct and incorrect hypotheses
respectively.  Discrimination functions are discussed in more detail
shortly. The score assigned to H by a KS of this kind will be the
sum of the discrimination scores for all the linguistic items it
finds. Thus each KS will eventually contribute a numerical score,
possibly via a discrimination function derived from an analysis of the
training corpus.

The total score for each hypothesis is a weighted sum of the scores
contributed by the various KSs. The final requirement is to use the
training corpus a second time to compute optimal weights for the
different KSs.  This is an optimization problem which can be
approximately solved using the method described in
 . 

The most interesting role in the above is played by the discrimination
functions. The intent is that linguistic items which tend to occur
more frequently in correct hypotheses than incorrect ones will get
positive scores; those which occur more frequently in incorrect
hypotheses than correct ones will get negative scores.  To take an
example from the ATIS domain, the trigram a list of is
frequently misrecognized by DECIPHER as a list the. Comparing
the different hypotheses for various utterances, we discover that if
we have two distinct hypotheses for the same utterance, one of which
is correct and the other incorrect, and the hypotheses differ by one
of them containing a list of while the other contains a
list the, then the hypothesis containing a list of is nearly
always the correct one. This justifies giving the trigram a list
of a positive score, and the trigram a list the a negative one.

We now define formally the discrimination function dT for a given
type T of linguistic item. We start by defining dT as a function
on linguistic items. As stated above, it is then extended in a natural
way to a function on hypotheses by defining dT(H) for a hypothesis
H to be 


 ,
where the sum is over all the linguistic
items L of type T associated with H.

dT(L) for a given linguistic item L is computed as follows. (This
 is a slight generalization of the method given in ). The training corpus is analyzed, and each hypothesis is tagged with
its set of associated linguistic items. We then find all possible
4-tuples 

(U, H1, H2, L) where

U is an utterance,

H1 and H2 are hypotheses for U exactly one of
which is correct,

L is a linguistic item of type T which is associated with exactly
one of H1 and H2.


If L occurs in the correct hypothesis of the pair 

(H1, H2), we
call this a ``good'' occurrence of L; otherwise, it is a ``bad''
one.  Counting occurrences over the whole set, we let g be the total
number of good occurrences of L, and b be the total number of bad
occurrences. The discrimination score of type T for L, dT(L),
is then defined as a function d(g,b). It seems sensible to demand that
d(g,b) has the following properties:



d(g,b) ] 0 if g ] b



d(g,b) = -d(b,g) (and hence 

d(g,b) = 0 if g = b).



d(g1,b) ] d(g2,b) if g1 ] g2


We have experimented with a number of possible such functions, the
best one appearing to be the following.

This formula is a symmetric, logarithmic transform of the function 

(g
+ 1)/(g + b + 2), which is the expected a posteriori
probability that a new 

(U, H1, H2, L) 4-tuple will be a good
occurrence, assuming that, prior to the quantities g and b being
known, this probability has a uniform a priori distribution on
the interval [0,1].

One serious problem with corpus-based measures like discrimination
functions is data sparseness; for this reason, it will often be
advantageous to replace the raw linguistic items L with equivalence
classes of such items, to smooth the data. We will discuss this
further in
 Section . 

This section describes experiments carried out to test
the general methods outlined in the previous section.
 Section  describes the general
experimental set-up, and
 Section  the specific knowledge sources used.
 Section  gives the results.

The experiments were run on the 1001 utterance subset of the ATIS
corpus used for the December 1993 evaluations, which was previously
unseen data for the purposes of the experiments. The corpus,
originally supplied as waveforms, was processed into N-best lists by
the DECIPHER (TM) recognizer. The recognizer used a class bigram
language model. Each N-best hypothesis received a numerical
plausibility score; only the top 10 hypotheses were retained.  The
1-best sentence error rate was about 34%, the 5-best error rate (i.e. the frequency with which the correct hypothesis was not in the top 5)
about 19%, and the 10-best error rate about 16%.  Linguistic
processing was performed using a version of the Core Language Engine
customized to the ATIS domain, which was developed under the
SRI-SICS-Telia Research Spoken Language Translator project
 ,,. The CLE normally assigns a hypothesis several different possible linguistic analyses, scoring each one with
a plausibility measure. The plausibility measure is highly optimized
 , and for the ATIS domain has an error rate of about 5%. Only the most plausible linguistic analysis was used.

The general CLE grammar was specialized to the domain using the
 Explanation-Based Learning (EBL) algorithm  and the  resulting grammar parsed using an LR parser , giving a decrease in analysis time, compared to the normal CLE
left-corner parser, of about an order of magnitude. This made it
possible to impose moderately realistic resource limits: linguistic
analysis was allowed a maximum of 12 CPU seconds per hypothesis,
running SICStus Prolog on a Sun SPARC station 10/41.  Analysis that
overran the time-limit was cut off, and corresponding data replaced by
null values.  Approximately 1.2% of all hypotheses timed out during
linguistic analysis; the average analysis time required per hypothesis
was 2.1 seconds.

Experiments were carried out by first dividing the corpus into five
approximately equal pools, in such a way that sentences from any given
 speaker were never assigned to more than one pool. Each pool was then in turn held out as test data, and the other four used as training
data. The fact that utterances from the same speaker never occurred
both as test and training data turned out to have an important effect
on the results, and is discussed in more detail later.

The following knowledge sources were used in the experiments:
Recognizer score:
The numerical score assigned to each
hypothesis by the DECIPHER (TM) recognizer. This is typically a large
negative integer.
In coverage:
Whether or not the CLE assigned the
hypothesis a linguistic analysis (1 or 0).
Unlikely grammar construction:
1 if the most plausible
linguistic analysis assigned to the hypothesis by the CLE was
``unlikely'', 0 otherwise. In these experiments, the only analyses
tagged as ``unlikely'' are ones in which the main verb is a form of
be, and there is a number mismatch between subject and
predicate, e.g. ``what is the fares?''.
Class N-gram discriminants
(four distinct knowledge sources):
Discrimination scores for 1-, 2-, 3- and 4-grams of classes of surface
linguistic items. The class N-grams are extracted after first grouping
some surface words into multi-word phrases, and then replacing some
common words and groups with classes; the dummy words *START*
and *END* are also added to the beginning and end of the list
respectively.  Thus, for example, the utterance one way flights to
d f w would after this phase of processing be *START*
flight_type_adj flights to airport_name *END*.
Grammar rule discriminants:
Discrimination scores for the grammar rules
used
in the most plausible linguistic analysis of the hypothesis, if there
was one.
Semantic triple discriminants:
Discrimination scores for ``semantic
triples'' in the most plausible linguistic analysis of the hypothesis,
if there was one. A semantic triple is of the form

(Head1,Rel,Head2), where Head1 and Head2 are head-words of
phrases, and Rel is a grammatical relation obtaining between them.
Typical values for Rel are ``subject'' or ``object'', when Head1is a verb and Head2 the head-word of one of its arguments;
alternatively, Rel can be a preposition, if the relation is a PP
modification of an NP or VP. There are also some other possibilities,
 cf. . 

The knowledge sources naturally fall into three groups. The first is
the singleton consisting of the ``recognizer score'' KS; the second
contains the four class N-gram discriminant KSs; the third consists of the
 remaining ``linguistic'' KSs. The method of  was used to calculate near-optimal weights for three combinations of
KSs:
1.
Recognizer score + class N-gram discriminant KSs
2.
Recognizer score + linguistic KSs
3.
All available KSs
In order to facilitate comparison, some other methods were tested as
well. Two variants of the ``highest-in-coverage'' method provided a
lower limit: the ``straight'' method, and one in which the hypotheses
were first rescored using the optimized combination of recognizer
score and N-gram discriminant KSs. This is marked in the tables as
``N-gram/highest-in-coverage'', and is roughly the strategy described
 in . An upper limit was set by a method which selected the hypothesis in the list with the lower number of insertions,
deletions and substitutions. This is marked as ``lowest WE in 10-best''.

 Table  shows the sentence error rates for different preference methods and utterance lengths, using 10-best
 lists; Table  shows the word error rates for each method on the full set.  The absolute decrease in the
sentence error rate between 1-best and optimized 10-best with all KSs
is from 33.7% to 29.9%, a proportional decrease of 11%. This is
nearly exactly the same as the improvement measured when the lists
were rescored using a class trigram model, though it should be
stressed that the present experiments used far less training data. The
word error rate decreased from 7.5% to 6.4%, a 13% proportional
decrease. Here, however, the trigram model performed significantly
better, and achieved a reduction of 22%.

It is apparent that nearly all of the improvement is coming from the
linguistic KSs; the difference between the lines ``recognizer +
linguistic KSs'' and ``all available KSs'' is not significant.  Closer
inspection of the results also shows that the improvement, when
evaluated in the context of the spoken language translation task, is
 rather greater than Table  would appear to indicate. Since the linguistic KSs only look at the abstract semantic
analyses of the hypotheses, they often tend to pick harmless syntactic
variants of the reference sentence; for example all of the can
be substituted for all the or what are ... for which
are .... When syntactic variants of this kind are scored as correct,
 the figures are as shown in Table . The improvement in sentence error rate on this method of evaluation is
from 28.8% to 22.8%, a proportional decrease of 21%. On either type
of evaluation, the difference between ``all available KSs'' and any
other method except ``recognizer + linguistic KSs'' is significant at
 the 5% level according to the McNemar sign test ). 

One point of experimental method is interesting enough to be worth a
diversion. In earlier experiments, reported in the notebook version of
the paper, we had not separated the data in such a way as to ensure
that the speakers of the utterances in the test and training data were
always disjoint. This led to results which were both better and also
qualitatively different; the N-gram KSs made a much larger
contribution, and appeared to dominate the linguistic KSs. This
presumably shows that there are strong surface uniformities between
utterances from at least some of the speakers, which the N-gram KSs
can capture more easily than the linguistic ones. It is possible that
the effect is an artifact of the data-collection methods, and is
wholly or partially caused by users who repeat queries after system
misrecognitions.

There were a total of 88 utterances for which there was some
acceptable 10-best hypothesis, but where the hypothesis chosen by the
method which made use of all available KSs was unacceptable. In order
to get a more detailed picture of where the preference methods might
be improved, these utterances were inspected and categorized into
different apparent causes of failure. Four main classes of failures
were considered:
Apparently impossible:
There is no apparent
reason to prefer the correct hypothesis to the one chosen without
access to intersentential context or prosody. There were two main
subclasses: either some important content word was substituted by
an equally plausible alternative (e.g. ``Minneapolis'' instead of
``Indianapolis''), or the utterance was so badly malformed that
none of the alternatives seemed plausible.
Coverage problem:
The correct hypothesis was not in implemented
linguistic coverage, but would probably have been chosen if it had
been; alternately, the selected hypothesis was incorrectly classed
as being in linguistic coverage, but would probably not have been
chosen if it had been correctly classified as ungrammatical.
Clear preference failure:
The information needed to make the
correct choice appeared intuitively to be present, but had not been
exploited.
Uncertain:
Other cases.
 The results are summarized in Table . 

