

                     In Victorian time Michael Faraday gingerly
                     liquefied gase inside thick-walled glass
                     tube. By World War I, ingenuity and
                     boldness of design allowed Harvard' Percy W.
                     Bridgman to reach much higher pressure along
                     semi-industry lines. His large press
                     disclosed innumerable new phase in familiar
                     condensed matter, most famously several new
                     crystalline phase of H2O.  Eventually he came
                     to water ice VI, which at the highest
                     pressure of the time remained an ice solid
                     even at the temperature of a very hot kitchen
                     oven.

                     The price of this mastery was not low: in
                     1922 a pressure container failed, steel flew
                     like shrapnel and two men were killed,
                     although the Harvard laboratory went on
                     safely for decade more. Step by step,
                     industry developed high-pressure technology
                     for large-scale synthes. The most important
                     early product was ammonia, made in the
                     million of ton by reacting hydrogen and
                     nitrogen gase at modest pressure. The most
                     celebrated is synthes diamond, by now a
                     high-pressure commodity.

                     Set some simple marker along the pressure
                     scale. Infant breath and puff their cheeks,
                     displaying small change in local air
                     pressure. Mountaintop lure other among us
                     into pressure lower by a factor of two or
                     so. The weather bring stay-at-homes
                     incessant , less noticeable variation in
                     pressure, but sea-level air still afford us
                     a meaningful natural unit. Call the typical
                     pressure at sea level one atmosphere.

                     Like many another kid, I was disappointed
                     year ago by the poor result of taking a
                     long rubber tube into the pool, in an attempt
                     to tap surface air for breath on the
                     bottom. No way! The added weight of even a
                     foot of water is too much for chest muscles.
                     To breath at any depth underwater, you need
                     either to be housed within some sealed
                     submersible or to sip breath of air fed from
                     a portable tank at regulated matching
                     pressure. That is SCUBA-self-contained
                     underwater breath apparatus.

                     The ocean define a second natural pressure
                     marker. Call 1,000 atmosphere one "ocean,"
                     by analogy. That value is a ballpark fit to
                     seawater pressure six mile down in the
                     deepest undersea trenches. The earliest
                     physical successe called for pressures
                     reaching one ocean or so, and the ice for
                     pressure half a dozen time greater. The
                     diamond appeared after World War II up at 50
                     or 100 oceans, at which graphite dissolved in
                     molten metal at white heat crystallize to
                     diamond. Such condition have become routine
                     in the special multiton presse that yield
                     synthetic diamond around the world.

                     Solid rock is denser than water, and our
                     planet' center lie a decisive 1,000 times
                     deeper than the average-depth sea bottom. We
                     can plausibly define a third natural
                     benchmark for core pressures, one equal to
                     1,000 ocean of 1,000 atmosphere each, or a
                     million atmospheres. Calling one atmosphere
                     by the crisper name "bar," it informal
                     equivalent, we use it multiple, one megabar,
                     as a convenient unit for describing the
                     tremendou pressure at the core.

                     It turn out to be surprisingly easy to
                     estimate the pressure so deep down. The
                     symmetrical Newtonian pull of all the
                     interior part on all the layer above
                     compact Earth into a near sphere. Even the
                     expected increase in density as depth
                     approache the center has at most a modest
                     effect on a calculation that treat the globe
                     as a uniform fluid. The central pressure
                     approximate the simple product of three
                     well-known quantities: the average density of
                     Earth; the planet' radius; and the familiar
                     constant g, the value of surface gravity
                     signaled by every apple that falls. That
                     central pressure is reliably estimated at
                     about four megabar whatever the internal
                     composition, if only all the strata are both
                     stable (not undermined by vast buried
                     caverns) and uniform from place to place,
                     differing only as their depth differs. What
                     is down there anyhow? This rich question
                     bear strongly on the literal root of all
                     geology.

                     Can we proceed with theory alone as guide?
                     Can we ignore unknown minerals and fluids,
                     some sure to be as strange as hot ice was?
                     The geophysicist wisely chose to experiment.
                     One megabar of pressure was first reached 20
                     year ago at the Geophysical Laboratory of
                     the Carnegie Institution of Washington. That
                     lab and other can now summon the conditions
                     of Hade itself right to the bench top.

                     The megabar apparatu in no way resemble the
                     heavy, house-size hydraulic presse of old,
                     stowed behind safety wall and served by a
                     team of cautiou engineers. It resemble more
                     a top-of-the-line research microscope in the
                     precision machining of it minute, elegant
                     part and is not unlike it as well in bulk,
                     weight and cost. No monster machine at all,
                     this device is mostly made in house by a few
                     master machinist as the prized tool of a few
                     physicists.

                     How do they evade danger, weight and expense?
                     Pressure is a local quantity. Even a handheld
                     steel sewing needpushed firmly into a surface
                     can exert oceanic pressure if only over a
                     tiny area. Megabar of pressure in a minute
                     container, a tenth of a millimeter on edge,
                     store up something like the energy released
                     by a pencil falling off the workbench. If
                     that holder fractures, expect only a small
                     pop, a source more of sharp fiscal pain than
                     of physical injury. Work small; a
                     miniature-scale apparatu produce pressure
                     to match a planet' core simply by
                     hand-tightening a single bolt!

                     But can you learn about Earth' center from
                     so small a sample? Indeed you can, for matter
                     is atomic. Its propertie are well developed
                     whenever sufficient atom are present long
                     enough to arrange themselve as the laws
                     require. That small pressure vessel holds
                     some million billion atoms, more than enough
                     to allow matter to fulfill its subtlest
                     intentions. A few microgram are ineffective
                     for making diamond commercially but
                     brilliantly suited to yield knowledge.

                     How will you learn what happen to matter
                     compressed under megabar? First, use a
                     transparent container, just as Faraday did.
                     Probe it adroitly with infrared and optical
                     lasers, with x-rays, neutrons, microwaves,
                     even sound. Tight, high-intensity beam may
                     be needed for a scant sample; for x-ray
                     diffraction studies, the geophysicist often
                     subject their pressure cell to a fierce
                     synchrotron source. The limit are set mainly
                     by the changing state of condensed-matter
                     physics.

                     How to contain the sample? Squeeze it inside
                     a tiny box of the hardest stuff known,
                     diamond. Find two flawless gems-single
                     crystal selected for purity and
                     extratransparency-then cut in facet to
                     order. Less than one carat in weight, they
                     will be dear but affordable. Align the tip
                     end of the two truncated diamond cone with
                     a thin ring gasket of steel alloy held
                     between the two tiny flattened tips. The
                     sample is confined within the hole in the
                     gasket. Press diamond hard against diamond,
                     and the whole assembly seal tight.

                     Megabar come easily. A diamond-diamond total
                     force of only a couple of hundred kilograms
                     is adequate, for that force is concentrated
                     over an extremely small area. Up-to-date
                     diamond-anvil cell may have contact faces
                     only a thirtieth of a millimeter across.
                     Sophisticated mounting design and virtuoso
                     fabrication keep the gem nearly parallel for
                     final optical alignment. Cryogenic cooling
                     and resistance heating are both quite
                     manageable.

                     The theorist opine that at about 12
                     megabar, diamond undergoe a change in
                     phase, and some anvil will break. That limit
                     is still ahead. About half that pressure is
                     expected to be enough to press molecular
                     hydrogen into hydrogen metal, a goal that has
                     long eluded the labs. In the past few months
                     there has been a credible report of making
                     the metal hydrogen using a big, noisy gas
                     gun, but the stuff lasted the mere
                     microsecond it took a shock wave to cross
                     the cryogenic hydrogen target.

                     Fortune may favor us with some new anvil
                     substance harder than pure diamond, so we
                     will be able to see the luster of that
                     simplest of metals. In this subtle corner of
                     condensed-matter physics, the pressure of a
                     planet's core is literally at hand, through
                     an art once awkward but now as harmonious as
                     a quiet song.
