
In this paper, we present a new method for characterizing the
interpretive possibilities generated by elliptical constructions in
natural language.  Unlike previous analyses, which postulate ambiguity
of interpretation or derivation in the full clause source of the
ellipsis, our analysis requires no such hidden ambiguity.  For
example, the ambiguity typically characterized as enabling ``strict''
versus ``sloppy'' readings of elliptical constructions does not arise
from a corresponding ambiguity as to whether the pronoun in the
antecedent clause is given a strict or sloppy interpretation; instead,
the ambiguity follows from the process of interpreting the elided
phrase on the basis of its unambiguous antecedent.  Further, the
analysis follows relatively directly from an abstract statement of the
ellipsis interpretation problem and applies to the interpretation of a
wide variety of elliptical constructions, including VP ellipsis, ``do
so'' and ``do it'' anaphora, gapping, stripping, and related
constructions involving recovery of implicit relations such as
``only'' modification and cleft constructions.  It predicts correctly
a wide range of interactions between ellipsis and other semantic
phenomena such as quantifier scope and bound anaphora.  Finally,
although the analysis itself is stated nonprocedurally, it admits of a
direct computational method for generating interpretations.

The analysis we present is intended to characterize the semantics of
constructions involving ellipsis.  Many interesting issues arise
regarding the syntax of ellipsis, and we will touch on some of these
issues; our main goal, though, is to characterize a method for
ellipsis interpretation.

We can provide an abstract and reasonably theory-neutral
characterization of ellipsis phenomena and their interpretation as
follows.  An elliptical construction involves two phrases (usually
clauses) that are parallel in structure in some sense.  The antecedent
or source clause is complete, whereas the target clause is
missing (or contains only vestiges of) material found
overtly in the source.  As a concrete example, which we will use as
our primary source of data in the paper, consider the verb phrase (VP)
ellipsis phenomenon, as in (1).

  Dan likes golf, and George does too. 

The sentence is interpreted as meaning that Dan and George
both like golf.  The source clause, `Dan likes golf', parallels the
target `George does too', with the subjects `Dan' and `George' being
parallel elements, and the VP of the target sentence being vestigially
 represented by the target phrase `does too'. 

Given this abstract view of ellipsis, the problem of ellipsis
interpretation is just to recover a property of (or relation over) the
parallel element (respectively, elements) in the target that the missing or
vestigial material stands proxy for.  Of course, this property is not
arbitrary.  We know that the application of the property or relation
to the parallel elements in the source constitutes the interpretation
 of the source clause.  In example () above, we know then that the property P being predicated of George in the second
sentence is such that when it is predicated of Dan, it means that Dan
likes golf.  We might state this equationally as follows:



A possible value for P in this equation is the
property represented by the lambda term 

.
Predicating this property of George, we have


which reduces to

.

In general, then, the abstract problem of ellipsis can be stated as
the problem of recovering solutions to the equation

  

where s1 through sn are the interpretations of the parallel
elements of the source, and s is the interpretation of the source
itself.  (The determination of the parallelism itself is a separate
problem, about which more later.)  Once P is determined,


serves as the interpretation of the target,
where t1 through tn are the interpretations of the corresponding
parallel elements of the target.

Not only is this an abstract characterization of the ellipsis problem,
it is essentially the entire analysis proposed in this paper.  It
constitutes an analysis because the equational statement of the
problem, together with some reasonable assumptions, determines
rigorously the sets of interpretations for target clauses, which
interpretations, we will see, correspond to the actual possible
interpretations of the target.

It is important that ellipsis analyses (including the equational one
outlined above) allow for ambiguity in the target clause, that is, for
a set of relations to be made available by the source clause.  The
availability of multiple relations is attested in various phenomena in
which the target clause has multiple readings; it can be seen most
clearly in the distinction between strict and sloppy readings.  In the
sentence

 Dan likes his wife, and George does too. 

(under the reading in which the pronoun `his' refers to Dan)
the property predicated of George might be the property of liking
Dan's wife or the property of liking one's own wife.  In lambda
notation, these two properties are given by



and



corresponding to the strict and sloppy readings of the
 sentence, respectively. As we will see, the possibility of several available properties arises in
other cases as well.

Most previous analyses of ellipsis have allowed for the possibility of
multiple available properties by arranging for the source clause to be
ambiguous as to what property it makes available.  That is, in an
individual instance, the source clause is interpreted in one of
several possible ways, leading to the use of a particular property in
the interpretation; the property used in the target clause is
identical to the corresponding property in the source clause.  Dahl
 was the first to draw a distinction between
approaches that place the ambiguity in the source clause (which he
called strict identity approaches) and those that place the
ambiguity in the process of recovering a property or relation for the
target (which he called sloppy or non-strict identity
approaches).  So as not to confuse the terminology here with that of
strict and sloppy readings, we will call the former kind of analysis
an identity-of-relations analysis, as opposed to a non-identity
analysis.

Under an identity-of-relations analysis, ambiguity of interpretation
in a target clause comes about because the source clause is ambiguous.
However, only a single relation is available from the source clause in
any given instance.  The relation that the source clause makes
available is, in most previous work, that associated with its VP,
though we emphasize that this is not a necessary condition for an
identity-of-relations analysis, nor do we believe it is a tenable
stance.

The multiplicity of interpretations for the elided phrase in an
identity-of-relations analysis may arise in various ways.  Purely
 interpretive analyses , allow for multiple semantic interpretations arising from an unambiguous syntactic
analysis of the source clause.  Partially interpretive analyses
involve either copying the syntactic tree from the source clause to
the target but requiring identical semantic interpretations for the
 two VPs , or deleting the phrase structure of the second tree under the constraint of identical interpretation
 .  Finally, syntactic analyses may also allow the semantic ambiguity to arise from underspecification in the copied
 constituent . 

The solutions therefore form a continuum, the ambiguity arising at more
or less superficial levels.  All of the analyses, however, share a
reliance on semantic ambiguity in the source clause.

Our solution to the question of what properties are made available can
be seen as lying at the far end of this continuum.  We eschew not only
syntactic ambiguity in the source clause, but semantic ambiguity
arising from any source, as a generator of the multiple readings of
elliptical constructions.  Instead, multiple solutions come about as a
natural result of directly stating the definition of the relation to
be applied in the target clause.

As described earlier, the problem of extracting a relation from the
source clause can be stated equationally as



In cases of VP ellipsis where the subjects of the source
and target are parallel, the equation is simply

P(s1) = s

where s1 is the interpretation of the subject of the source
clause.  By solving this equation for the unknown, P, we generate
the relation (or relations, if multiple solutions exist) that the
resolution of the ellipsis requires.

 Huet's higher-order unification algorithm  provides a means of completely enumerating representations of the
solutions of such equations, under assumptions whose detailed
 discussion we defer to Section . 

As an example of the use of equations to state a problem in ellipsis
 resolution, consider () above, repeated here: 

Dan likes golf, and George does too.

Recall that `Dan' and `George' are the parallel elements in
this example, and the semantic interpretation of `Dan likes golf' is




We have underlined what we will call primary
occurrences of the parallel element's interpretation, for reasons to be
clarified later.  In this case, the single occurrence of dan is
primary.  Any other occurrences will be referred to as secondary.

To form an interpretation for the second conjunct, we require a
property P that, when applied to the interpretation of the subject
of the first conjunct, will yield the interpretation of the first
conjunct as a whole.  This property will serve to generate the
interpretation of the target clause.  It will be applied to the
interpretation of the parallel element, that of the subject `George',
in the second clause.

We can state this requirement directly with the following equation, an
 instance of the more general equation (): 

  


The latter term is the interpretation for the source sentence;
the equation requires P to be a property that, when predicated of
the subject interpretation dan, yields the first term.

A solution for an equation can be represented by a substitution of
values for the free variables in the equation that makes both sides of
the equation identical. For example, the following two alternative
 substitutions solve equation (): 







The first substitution will be disregarded because it leaves
a primary occurrence in the result.  This constraint requiring abstraction of primary occurrences comes about because the parallel
element in the target clause must play the primary role in the meaning
of the target.  We will have more to say about this in
 Section , especially as regards the distinction between primary and secondary occurrences.  Given this
constraint, the only remaining value for P is the property

.
We can now use this function as the
interpretation of the elided VP in (1); with P(george) as the
interpretation of the target clause, this gives the following
 semantics for the sentence as a whole: 




In summary, our analysis of the abstract problem of ellipsis
resolution, that is, generating appropriate properties to be used in
interpreting the target clause, is to state the problem equationally
based on the parallel structure in the two clauses and to solve the
equation using higher-order unification (under the constraint
requiring abstraction of primary occurrences).  The properties that
are generated as solutions to the equation are predicated of the
parallel elements in the target clause to generate the target clause
interpretation.

As seen in the preceding example, the equation stating an ellipsis
interpretation problem may have several alternative solutions, which
the higher-order unification algorithm will generate.  Specifically,
when there are multiple occurrences of some subterm in a term,
multiple alternative substitutions for the relation formed by
 abstracting out that subterm will exist. Consider sentence (   ), repeated here: 

 Dan likes his wife, and George does too.   

Let us assume the following interpretation for the first
conjunct:




The first occurrence of dan, which arises directly
from the parallel element, the subject `Dan', is primary; the
occurrence arising from the pronoun, which is not a parallel element,
is secondary.  Solution of the equation


by higher-order unification
yields four ways of forming a property by abstracting out the
semantics of the subject.  The possible values for P are













Again, the first two solutions fail the constraint on
abstraction of primary occurrences.  Either of the other two remaining
properties yields a possible interpretation of the target clause.  The
first gives rise to what has been called the strict reading of the
second conjunct, while the second gives rise to the sloppy reading:




(George likes Dan's wife.)




(George likes George's wife.)

As illustrated in the foregoing examples, we use the distinction
between primary and secondary occurrences of a term to constrain the
acceptable solutions of an ellipsis interpretation equation.  We
define a primary occurrence as an occurrence of a subexpression in the
semantic form directly associated with one of the parallel elements in
the source clause; we assume that the notion of ``directly
associated'' is sufficiently well-defined for the purposes at hand.
We then require that the solution process preserve the primacy of
occurrences, with the consequence that solutions must abstract over
all primary occurrences in the source. In other words: Solutions
must not include primary occurrences.  In
 example (), this constraint removes from consideration the first two putative solutions
 in (). 

If the constraint were not in force, the following readings would be
produced for `... and George does too':


... and Dan likes Dan's wife.


... and Dan likes George's wife.

These are just the readings where the parallelism between
the clauses has been disregarded.  Thus, the constraint is a reflex of
the inherent parallelism in elliptical constructions.

The existence of this constraint means, not surprisingly, that it is
necessary to retain a connection between the syntactic and the
semantic representation of the source sentence.  By maintaining this
connection, we can ensure that the solutions produced by higher-order
unification satisfy the constraint that parallelism must be maintained
 by abstracting out of parallel positions. 

One of the distinguishing features of our analysis is that the
ellipsis resolution problem is separated into two subtasks: a prior
determination of the parallel structure of source and target, and
consequent formation of the implicit relation to be used in the
target.  We have been addressing the latter subtask primarily, and
will continue to do so, but we digress to mention some perhaps obvious
facts about the parallelism determination that might get lost in the
sequel.

The task of determining the parallel structure of two
clauses is far more subtle, and less syntactic, than a cursory
examination exposes.  (We discuss this issue further in
 Section .)  For this reason, the division of the ellipsis problem into two parts--separating parallelism determination
from relation formation--allows a simpler description of relation
formation and a more appropriate characterization of the problem of
determination of parallelism.  Nonetheless, this paper does not
provide a theory of parallelism; previous attempts have been far too
restrictive, limiting themselves to purely syntactic criteria.  The
wide range of possibilities for parallelism described in
 Section  indicate that the process is not a purely linguistic one.  As an extreme example, we describe in
 Section  cases of parallelism with no linguistic source whatsoever.

Our emphasis in this paper on issues in relation
formation and our liberal view of parallelism determination should
not, of course, be taken to imply that no constraints apply to the
task of determining parallelism.  For example, parallelism must
 respect stativeness of verbs () and  pleonasticity of noun phrases (). 

  Dan likes golf and George is too.

It is raining and George is too.

Depth of embedding imposes constraints as well.


The mayor of Washington left, and New York did too.

(We ignore the nonsensical reading in which the city of New
York was the agent of the leaving action.)  Similarly, the sentence

It is obvious that Dan is happy, and George is too.

(pointed out to us by Mats Rooth) can only be interpreted as
meaning that George is happy, not that it is obvious that George is
happy.  If the obviousness is included, the parallelism would have to
hold between `George' and `it', not `Dan'.

Such constraints hold not only in VP ellipsis, but also in gapping,
stripping, comparative deletion and other elliptical constructions.
Thus, not all constraints on readings of elliptical sentences follow
from the relation formation issues that are the primary topic of this
paper.

Furthermore, there are syntactic constraints that apply differentially
to different ellipsis constructions.  Even among constructions eliding
VPs, such as the ``do'', ``do so'', and ``do too'' variants, syntactic
distinctions can be found.  For instance, as noted by 
, these variants differ in their
grammaticality in antecedent-contained-ellipsis contexts:

John greeted every person that Bill did.
* John greeted every person that Bill did so.
? John greeted every person that Bill did too.

These fine syntactic distinctions are not addressed by the
present analysis, which attempts to make clear only the space of
semantic interpretations.

Of course, not all elements in the target clause must be analyzed as
parallel to some element in the source.  For instance, adverbial
phrases can be viewed as modifying the target directly.  This
 possibility is exemplified by the following sentence: 

Jim couldn't open the door, but Polly did with her blowtorch.

No empty adverbial modifier need be posited in the source
clause; the instrumental modifies the target sentence directly.  (Such
elements can be made parallel in other cases, however; see
 Section  for examples.) 

We outline here the formal machinery underlying the semantic
analyses used in this paper.

Meanings of phrases are to be represented by terms of a typed
higher-order system with lambda abstraction. Since we are not
concerned here with intensional phenomena, we will just need the basic
types e (entities) and t (truth values). Two type constructors
will be used: 


to form the type 


of
functions mapping arguments of type T to results of type T', and

to form the type 


of pairs 


such that thas type T and t' has type T'.

We will use various elementary concepts from the lambda calculus,
specifically the notions of free and bound occurrences of
variables, and of substitution of a lambda term for a variable.  We
will notate the substitution of term N for all free occurrences of
x in M by 

.
We require, as is typical, that
substitution rename bound variables in M appropriately to avoid
capture of free variables in N.  The reader is urged to refer to
Hindley and Seldin HindleySeldin:Lambda for precise definitions
of these notions.

We have proposed codifying the ellipsis interpretation problem using
expressions equating terms that represent phrase meanings. What counts
as a solution to such an equation depends crucially on what notion of
equality between terms we are considering, or, in other words, on when
we consider that two terms denote the same semantic object. One
salient notion of equality is that of 


 interconvertibility , which captures formally the intuitive notion that two terms can represent the same
``recipe'' for calculating a function.  Specifically, two terms are
considered equal if one can be converted to the other by repeated
application of the following rules and their inverses:

conversion:
convert 


to

,
that is, the names of bound variables
are immaterial to their meaning. The two terms are said to be alphabetic variants.

conversion:
convert 


to

.
This represents formally the operation of applying a
function to an argument.

conversion:
convert 


to M when x does not occur free in M.

We have claimed that the meaning of

 Dan likes golf, and George does too. 

is




where the equation




must be satisfied.  It is not obvious that the equation in
0 is semantically interpretable, as opposed to being a recipe for
invoking a formal procedure, higher-order unification, with no
underlying meaning in and of itself.  Clearly, the combined meaning of
-1 and 0 is not equivalent to



This would merely require that P be such that it is true
of Dan if Dan likes golf.  Since the first conjunct states that Dan
does in fact like golf, P need only be a true property of Dan.  The
entire formula then requires only that George possess some property,
any property, that Dan possesses, which would give an incorrect
interpretation for the target sentence.  The equation is not to be
interpreted, then, as codenotation in a model.

Instead, we want ellipsis to be more content-independent, in that the
property should be such that the equation holds whether or not Dan
happens to like golf.  It should be independent of the particulars of
a given model, that is, it should hold in any model in a suitable
class of models.  But we have to be careful about the choice of model
class.  Even necessary truths should not codenote over the class of
models in which the ellipsis equation is interpreted.  Otherwise, the
sentence

Every square has four sides, and every rhombus does too.

would be subject to an interpretation where what is
predicated of every rhombus is some property of squares that is true
of them in whatever models assign squares four sides.  But these, ex hypothesi, include all the models, so any property true of all
squares (such as having four equal angles) would do.  The sentence
might mean, then, that every rhombus has four equal angles.  Of
course, it does not.  Similarly, logical tautologies must not be
 valid; sentence () does not, for example, mean that George likes golf and either it is raining or it is not raining, even
though this is logically equivalent to George liking golf.

The class of models, then, in which the ellipsis equation is held as
valid is very weak.  In fact, for higher-order unification to be an
appropriate procedure for determining valid instances, the valid
equations must be exactly those whose two sides are 

-interconvertible.  Higher-order unification finds the most
general substitutions of terms for the free variables in an equation
that make the equation valid.

Friedman:Equality demonstrates that such equalities are
exactly those that hold in all extensional models for the typed lambda
calculus (without interpreted constants), and also exactly those that
hold in any model consisting of all the higher-order functions over
some infinite base set, with application interpreted as function
application.  Although the logic that we presuppose is augmented with
a full first-order quantificational logic (and presumably, for
intensional phenomena, would be an intensional logic), recall that the
tautologies of this logic are not required to hold for the purposes of
interpreting the ellipsis equations; the symbols of the logic
(,
,
etc.) can be viewed as uninterpreted function
symbols of the appropriate type.  The only structure that the model
manifests is, then, the structure arising from the categorial or type
structure of the language, together with the reasonable requirement of
extensionality.

Thus, the semantic invariants in ellipsis resolution are those that
follow from the type structure--the function-argument
relationships--of natural language, and not from any contingent or
even necessary truths.  This accords with intuition, in that the
felicity of ellipsis does not depend on the meaning of the words in
the source sentence (though the elided property does), but does depend
on their type structure.  An ellipsis equation is not merely a recipe
for a syntactic process.  It has a meaning, but the meaning must be
taken in a different, and much more profligate, model than that of the
interpretation of the sentence itself.  The ellipsis equation reflects
semantic facts about the sentence, but just at the gross level of
function-argument structure.

There is one remaining problem, however, for this view of ellipsis
equations--the issue of primary occurrences.  The primary occurrence
notation serves to couple the ellipsis equations to the choice of
parallel elements, and provides a way of forcing abstraction over the
meanings of the parallel elements.  Intuitively, the distinction
between primary and secondary occurrences is clear: a primary
occurrence corresponds to a distinguished semantic role in the
situations described by the source and target clauses.  At present,
however, we have no way of making precise the intuitions that led to
the primary occurrence notation; that is, we know of no semantic
correlate to the equational system with primary occurrence notation
under the related constraint on abstraction.  It remains for future
work to reconstruct the semantical foundations of this variant of
higher-order unification.  Although we have some ideas as to how such
a reconstruction might proceed, it is premature to discuss them here.

The unification problem for terms in a logical system is the problem
of finding substitutions for the free variables of two terms t and
t' that make the terms equal.  Such a substitution is called a unifier of t and t'. A unifier 
is more general
than another unifier 
if there is a nontrivial substitution

such that 

,
where 
is
the result of applying substitution 
to term t. Informally,
a more general unifier will leave more free variables, or make fewer
variable identifications, than a less general one. Unifiers that are
most general represent the solutions of a unification problem in their
simplest form, since any less general unifier (solution) can be
obtained from the output of a most general one by additional
substitutions of terms for free variables. As is well known, the
unification problem for first-order terms, and the related unification
problem for certain kinds of feature graphs, admit of unique most
general unifiers (up to variable renaming). However, this is not the
case for higher-order unification, in which variables can range over
functions of arbitrary order rather than just over [first-order]
individuals. This multiplicity of unifiers corresponds to the
possibility of multiple alternative interpretations for elided
material.

Huet's higher-order unification algorithm enumerates the unifiers of
higher-order terms in a typed -calculus of the kind we are
using. Because higher-order unification is in general undecidable,
given two terms, the algorithm will either stop without finding any
unifiers (the terms are not unifiable), generate successive [most
general] unifiers (possibly without end), or run forever without
producing any unifiers.  This computational property of higher-order
unification has not been problematic on the cases we have examined
that are engendered by ellipsis resolution, however, and there are
several reasons why this might be so.

First, many of the equations arising in ellipsis resolution fall under
the subcase called second-order matching.  In the second-order
subcase of unification, variables range only over individuals and
first-order functions.  The simpler matching problem occurs when the
substitution need be applied only to one of the terms, that is, 

.
Huet and Lang HuetLang:SecondOrder use
second-order matching as a way of applying program transformations in
a manner reminiscent of the method used for ellipsis interpretation in
this paper.  Second-order matching is, fortunately, decidable, and
Huet and Lang provide an algorithm, which is an adaptation of Huet's
more general algorithm for the subcase of interest.

Furthermore, many of the equations we will be interested in solving
are of the schematic form



where the si are all ground, that is, contain no free
variables.  The special case of second-order matching engendered by
instances of this schema is computationally even more tractable.
There are only a finite number of unifiers and these can be simply
constructed as follows: Construct a term s from s0 by replacing
zero or more instances of the si by xi.  For each such s,
construct a possible binding for P given by 

.
Clearly, there are at most 2[c] such unifiers
where c is the number of occurrences of the si in s0, and
these can be enumerated efficiently (in time linear in the output
length).

Finally, although certain phenomena require use of the more general
higher-order unification (as the examples in
 Section ), the bulk of the cases considered in this paper rely on the ground subcase of second-order matching, and
are therefore less computationally problematic.  Of course, even the
higher-order cases we consider may turn out to fall into a
computationally reasonable subclass; further inquiry in this area
would be useful.

Before characterizing the interaction between our analysis of ellipsis
and various other semantic phenomena, we must first lay out an
approach to semantic interpretation--quantifier scoping in
particular--in which to couch the discussion.  For the most part, the
particulars of the method for characterizing quantifier scoping are
relatively unimportant; the analysis could be stated in terms of
 Cooper storage, say, or even quantifier raising. We will use here a variation of a method for interpreting quantifier scoping and
long-distance dependencies developed by Pereira
Pereira:SemComp.  For those readers unfamiliar with this
method, we provide some examples later in this section.

In general, the interpretation of a phrase will have the form


where 
is a set of assumptions
analogous to a quantifier store in the Cooper storage method
  and m is a matrix term in which free variables introduced by the assumptions in 
may occur.

The assumptions used for quantifier scoping are triples of the form


where q is a determiner meaning, x is a
free variable, and p is a term of type t in which x is
 free. The assumption  

is said
to introduce variable x.  A quantified noun phrase is
interpreted as a variable introduced by an assumption whose first
component is the meaning of the noun phrase's determiner and whose third
component represents the meaning of the noun phrase's nominal.

Instead of the usual generalized quantifier type 


for determiner meanings,
we will use the pair quantifier type 

.
In other words, the meaning of a determiner takes a
function from entities to pairs of truth values and yields a
truth value. For example, the meaning of every will be the
function that assigns `true' just to those functions that take each
entity to a pair whose second component is true whenever its first
component is.

Our somewhat unusual type for determiner meanings, which is needed in
our analysis of antecedent-contained ellipsis
 (Section ) can be understood as a lambda calculus implementation of some aspects of Discourse Representation
 Theory (DRT) ,. Specifically, the interpretation of

 John greeted every person. 

will be for us




which we will abbreviate as



This interpretation can be directly related to the discourse
representation structure (DRS) for the same sentence:


The discourse marker x corresponds to the variable to be abstracted,
the left inner DRS to the first element of the pair in
 () (the quantifier restriction), the right inner DRS to the second element of the pair (the quantifier scope) and the arrow to
the determiner meaning every. The referential connection established
by the discourse marker x in the DRS is simulated in our analysis by
the simultaneous abstraction of the variable x over both the
restriction and the scope of the quantifier.

It is straightforward to show that there is a one-to-one
correspondence between Barwise-Cooper generalized quantifiers and pair
quantifiers.  Indeed, such a correspondence is established by two
functionals, ,
mapping pair quantifiers to generalized
quantifiers, and ,
mapping generalized quantifiers to pair
quantifiers, satisfying 


and 

.

and 
are defined as:



where 


and 

.

For a derivation to be considered complete, all assumptions must be
discharged. We will exemplify this process with
 sentence (). 

The quantified noun phrase `every person' is given the interpretation



that is, the meaning of the noun phrase is x under the
assumption to the left of the .

The verb meaning 


applied to the
NP meaning yields a VP meaning, still under the above
assumption:



Application of this VP meaning to the subject meaning

results in this sentence meaning:



Discharging the quantifier assumption involves applying the quantifier
every to the result 


of abstracting x over the pair consisting of
the restriction and the scope of the quantifier. The resulting
interpretation is 



that is, a
sentence meaning free of undischarged assumptions. When several
quantifier assumptions are introduced, there is the option of
discharging them in several different orders, leading to alternative
quantifier scopings for the sentence.

In Pereira's original system, the treatment of quantifier assumptions
is semantically justified by showing how such derivations are
convenient shorthand for derivations in the Curry system of semantic
combination containing only the operations of functional application
and abstraction. In the present variant, we could carry out a similar
justification in a system that would include pairing in addition to
functional application and composition
 ,. 

The treatment of the semantics of long-distance dependencies is
handled similarly by introducing and discharging assumptions.
Again, the form of these introduction and discharge rules could be
justified on the basis of functional application and abstraction.  As
an example of a derivation involving a long-distance dependency, we
consider the example

John greeted every person that arrived.

The trace in the subject position of the relative clause can
be thought of as introducing a bind assumption for a new variable



which serves as the argument to 


(the
interpretation of `arrived'):



The relative clause being completed, we can now discharge
the bind assumption.  We do so by forming a higher-order predicate by
abstracting the matrix, conjoined with a place-holder for the modified
nominal, and abstracted by the bound variable.



This relative clause meaning serves as a function over the
nominal meaning 

.



Finally, the rule for combining a quantifier every with a
predicate forms a quantifier assumption over a new variable.



From here, the derivation continues as before, yielding the sentence
meaning (before the quantifier is discharged)



and the scoped meaning is



This completes the background information on the formal semantics we
will presume in the remainder of the paper.

The approach to ellipsis resolution that is advocated here displays
differences from previous approaches in its handling of various
phenomena.  We will discuss how our analysis differs from
identity-of-relations analyses in general, and certain particular
instances thereof, by briefly examining the predictions of the
analyses with respect to the following phenomena:

Non-constituent abstractions:
There are many cases in which
the relation constructed from the source clause does not correspond in
any straightforward fashion to the interpretation of some syntactic
constituent: for example, when it must take more than one argument.
For instance, the tense and aspect as well as the subject are
abstracted in the sentence
Dan is running for president, and George did last term.
Examples demonstrate other nonstandard abstractions as well. Such
cases are especially problematic for identity-of-relations analyses in
which the relation  is necessarily associated with some
constituent such as the VP in the source clause.

Multiple property extraction:
In some cases, a single sentence
serves as the antecedent for two subsequent instances of ellipsis
involving different parallel elements:
John finished reading the poem before Bill did, and the short story too.
This sentence has a reading on which John finished reading both the
poem and the short story before Bill finished reading the poem.  This
is problematic for identity-of-relations analyses in which only a
single property is available in any given instance for the
interpretation of subsequent elided phrases.

Cascaded ellipsis:
Analyses differ as to what readings are
predicted for sentences containing multiple elliptical clauses in
which the interpretation of one elided constituent depends partially
or entirely on the interpretation of another elided constituent.  An
example is:
John realizes that he is a fool, but Bill does not, even though
his wife does.

Interaction with quantifier scoping:
As is well known, the
ambiguities following from varying quantifier scope possibilities
interact with ellipsis resolution possibilities.  For instance, in the
sentence
John greeted every person when Bill did.
two readings are possible, depending on whether the universal quantifier
has wide scope over both the main and subordinate clause, or
quantifies separately in each clause.  But in
John greeted every person that Bill did.
only a wide scope reading is available.

We discuss each of these phenomena below, and demonstrate that our
approach constructs appropriate solutions.  In the succeeding section,
we discuss in detail an example sentence which illustrates differences
among a number of analyses of ellipsis that have been proposed in the
past.  Finally, we turn to problematic cases for this and other
analyses.

There are many instances in which the interpretation of elided phrases
does not correspond to the interpretation of a syntactic constituent
in the source clause.  The most obvious cases include the elliptical
constructions of gapping or stripping.  But VP ellipsis provides
examples as well.  For instance, there are cases in which a deeply
embedded constituent induces a sloppy reading; in other cases,
relations are formed with multiple parallel elements in the source and
target clause; in still other cases, as discussed in
 Section  below, the parallelism between the elements in the source and target clause is not syntactic, but
semantically or pragmatically induced.  These cases are problematic
for identity-of-relations approaches in general, since such approaches
would have to make available a very large number of different semantic
analyses for each source clause, some of them otherwise unmotivated,
to allow for all of the possible interpretations that might need to be
provided for subsequent ellipsis.  They are particularly problematic
for identity-of-relations analyses in which the interpretation
provided by the source clause corresponds to the translation of a
syntactic constituent in the source.

The primary argument given by Reinhart Reinhart:Anaph for
the distinction between bound variable and referential pronouns is the
requirement that bound variable pronouns must be c-commanded by their
antecedents.  She uses this requirement to predict that the following
example has only a strict reading:

 People from LA adore it and so do people from NY.  [Reinhart's (17a), page 150]

Reinhart proposes a requirement that a pronoun must be
c-commanded by its antecedent if the antecedent is a quantifier;
further, she claims that a pronoun giving rise to a sloppy
interpretation must be c-commanded by its antecedent.  For Reinhart,
then, the availability of a sloppy reading correlates with the
possibility of a bound-variable interpretation of a pronoun, and she
requires a c-command relation for this interpretation to be possible.
This restriction simplifies the task of an identity-of-relations
analysis because it reduces the number of cases in which a sloppy
reading is available.  An analysis postulating ambiguity of pronoun
interpretation for only this restricted set of cases seems
methodologically more plausible.

However, Reinhart herself  notes certain
counterexamples to this correlation, cases where a sloppy reading is
available even when c-command does not hold:

Felixi's mother thinks hei's a genius and so does
Siegfried's mother.  [Reinhart's (8a)]

We'll discuss Rosai's problems with heri parents and
Sonya's problems too.  [Reinhart's (8b)]

Wescoat:StrictSloppy notes a number of more extreme cases of
sloppy readings involving non-c-commanding, embedded constituent
antecedents, such as:

 The policeman who arrested John failed to read him his rights, and so did the one who arrested Bill.

The person who introduced Mary to John would not give her his phone
number, nor would the person who introduced Sue to
Bill.

Wescoat claims, and we agree, that sloppy readings are
possible with these sentences; that is, that the following readings
are available--perhaps even preferred--for them:

The policeman who arrested John failed to read John John's
rights, and the one who arrested Bill failed to read Bill Bill's rights.

The person who introduced Mary to John would not give Mary John's
phone number, and the person who introduced Sue to Bill would not give
Sue Bill's phone number.

Hirschberg and Ward
HirschbergWard:StrictSloppy have obtained experimental
evidence consistent with these examples that the c-command criterion
posited by Reinhart and counterexemplified by Wescoat is not a general
requirement for sloppy readings.  For example, their data show that as
many as one-third of a group of  test subjects preferred
the sloppy reading of
People from Los Angeles think it's a scary place to
live, and so do people from New York.  [Hirschberg and Ward's (31)]
 which parallels sentence () closely. 

On our analysis, barring any stipulated prohibition, there is no
obstacle to forming relations abstracted over arbitrarily deeply
embedded positions.  In skeletal form, the analysis of such an example
would proceed as follows.  Suppose the source clause of
 () is interpreted as 



where pwi(x,y) is the person
who introduced x to y, and phone(x) is x's phone number. The
parallel elements in the construction are, respectively, `the person
who introduced Mary to John' and `the person who introduced Sue to
Bill'; `Mary' and `Sue'; `John' and `Bill'.  Thus, the appropriate
equation to solve is



The sloppy reading is engendered by the following unifying
substitution for P:

          


which, when applied to the interpretations of the parallel
elements in the target, yields the target interpretation



 Note that the recovered relation () is not a relation corresponding to a conventional interpretation for the
VP--or any other constituent--in the source clause.  On an
identity-of-relations analysis, such relations would be available only
by virtue of their use in the derivation of the source clause
interpretation.  This would necessitate the postulation of wild
ambiguity in the source clause, one derivation for each possible case
of subsequent ellipsis.

There exist many cases of multiple parallel elements in the source and
target clause; it is very common for ellipsis to involve relations
formed by abstraction of elements other than the interpretation of the
subject noun phrase.

For example, the tense and aspect of the target clause might differ
from that in the source clause:

Dan is running for president, and George did last term.

The mood can also differ:

``I want to leave.''  ``Well, do.''

``Eat your dinner.''  ``I did.''

The two clauses may differ in polarity:

 Dan didn't leave, but George did. 

These examples show that relations of varying arity must be
available as interpretations for elided phrases.  The consequence of
this for theories where the relation available for interpretation of
subsequent ellipsis must be available in the source sentence is,
again, that every sentence which can be the antecedent for subsequent
ellipsis must be many ways ambiguous; an interpretation must be
available for each relation that might be needed to interpret ellipsis
in subsequent discourse.

On the equational analysis, however, such ambiguity is not required.
A single interpretation for the source clause can give rise to any
required interpretation for the target, since there is no inherent
restriction as to the number or nature of the parallel elements
involved in the ellipsis.

 Take, for instance, the sentence in ().  Here, the parallel elements are `Dan' and `George' (the subjects), and the
positive and negative polarities, represented semantically as
 operators pos and neg. Thus, the equation 



can be solved yielding



and applied to the target parallel elements:



Of course, gapping and stripping provide abundant examples of
non-subject abstraction involving other arguments or modifiers;
 provides this example, which
involves non-subject parallel elements and has both a strict and a
sloppy reading:

You can keep Rosa in her room for the whole afternoon,
but not Zelda. [Reinhart's (18c)]

 also discusses examples
involving both subject and non-subject parallelism:

Maxwell killed the judge with a silver hammer, and I'd like to do the
same thing to that cop, with a cudgel. [Jackendoff's (6.196)]

Fred hung Tessie up in a tree and poured paint on her,
but I bet he wouldn't do it to Sue with glue. [Jackendoff's (6.197)]

A difficulty in any identity-of-relations analysis, which makes
available only one interpretation for subsequent clauses exhibiting
ellipsis, is seen when a single sentence is the antecedent for the
ellipsis of two different noun phrases.  Consider the following:

John finished reading the poem before Bill did, and the short story too.

This sentence has a reading on which John finished reading
both the poem and the short story before Bill finished reading the
poem.  On this reading, the source for both elliptical clauses is the
same clause, `John finished reading the poem.'  To produce a relation
which can be the interpretation for the elided VP whose subject is
Bill, the interpretation for the sentence `John finished reading the
poem' must be derived as:



so as to make available the property 

.
Similarly, an interpretation
must also be produced for the second conjunct `and the short story too'.
On the desired reading, the interpretation for `John finished reading
the poem' must be derived as:



Under an identity-of-relations analysis, the source clause is
deemed ambiguous between the two derivations. They do not
simultaneously exist in a given analysis; only one or the other may be
chosen.  Thus, the reading noted above would not be generable.  On the
other hand, an analysis such as ours allows for the formation of two
different relations from the semantic representation of the first
sentence; the representation of the first sentence does not constrain
the possibilities for construction of such relations.  The next
section provides an example of a similar problem and its derivation in
our framework.

We use the term ``cascaded ellipsis'' to refer to cases of multiple
ellipsis in which one of the elided constituents depends on another
elided constituent for its interpretation.  Analyses dependent on an
identity-of-relations approach generally make available fewer
readings in cascaded ellipsis cases than the analysis presented here;
we believe that the greater number of readings available with our
analysis is in fact warranted.

Dahl:SI provides the
following example (Dahl's (12), an English paraphrase of Scheibe's
(58a) Scheibe:Problem):

 John realizes that he is a fool, but Bill does not, even though his wife does.

Dahl claims that this sentence has, among other readings,
the following one:

John realizes that John is a fool but

Bill does not realize that Bill is a fool, even though

Bill's wife realizes that Bill is a fool

 discusses this example; his claim
is that this reading is not available for this sentence.  We disagree,
and find the reading acceptable.

On our analysis, this reading is
readily available.  Assume that the interpretation for `John realizes
that he is a fool' on the reading under discussion is:



This sentence serves as the antecedent for the elided phrase
in the second conjunct, `Bill does not'.  `Bill' and `John' are
parallel elements; for the reading under discussion, second-order
matching solves the equation



producing, among others, the following property
(corresponding to the sloppy option):



which is applied
to `Bill'.  The interpretation for the second conjunct as a whole is,
 then, the following: 



We assume that the second clause may serve as an antecedent
for the elided portion of the third conjunct.  The parallel elements
 are `Bill' and `his wife'; the ellipsis equation is 



On the reading under discussion, the
strict option is chosen; the property Q applied to the
interpretation of `his wife' is:



The resulting interpretation for the third conjunct is:



Although we have described the derivation of the meaning for this
example in terms of temporal ordering (we resolve the first ellipsis,
using its result to resolve the second), it is important to note that
the analysis is truly order-free.  In essence, we merely set up two
equations in two unknowns and solve them using unification.  The
result, as is typical with declarative, equational methods, does not
depend on solving the equations in a particular order.

Under an identity-of-relations analysis, such as Sag's, the existence
of this reading is problematic, as he notes.  The problem is that
there are conflicting requirements on the form of the semantic
representation of the second clause.

Sag obtains strict and sloppy readings under ellipsis by optionally
applying a rule that replaces the interpretation of a pronoun (which
has an invariant referent and induces a strict reading) by a
lambda-bound variable (inducing a sloppy reading).  The representation
 Sag provides for the first two conjuncts is: 







Crucially, the interpretation for the pronoun `he' which is
reconstructed in the second conjunct is represented by a bound
variable.

In contrast, for the reading under discussion, the representation for
the second and third conjuncts is:






The strict reading is only available when the option
of replacing the pronoun interpretation with a lambda-bound variable
is not taken.  These conflicting requirements make it impossible for
Sag's analysis--or any identity-of-relations analysis, where the
difference between a strict and a sloppy reading corresponds to a
difference in the form of the semantic representation--to obtain the
reading for this sentence that we (and Dahl) assume exists.

 As described in Section , quantifier scope is generated through a mechanism of discharging of assumptions introduced
in the course of a derivation.  The interaction between quantifier
scoping and ellipsis, then, will simply involve the relative
derivational order of discharging such quantifier assumptions and
resolving elliptical constructs.  That is, when we set up the
appropriate instance of the schematic equation 

,
s is the meaning of the source clause, possibly
under one or more undischarged assumptions.

As an example, we consider the two sentences given in
 (). 

  John greeted every person when Bill did. John greeted every person that Bill did.

As noted by Sag Sag:PhD, the quantifier scope
possibilities differ for these two sentences: whereas
 () admits of two readings, () allows only one.  Both Sag and Williams Williams:DLF provide
analyses for these semantic intuitions.

 We will take the source of the ellipsis in () to be the clause `John greeted every person', and the target to be `Bill
 did'.  The derivation of interpretations for () proceeds as follows.  The source clause is interpreted under a
quantifier assumption generated by the subject NP.  (See
 Section  for the derivation.)

  


We might discharge the assumption at this point, but we
choose not to in this first scenario.  Consequently, the
interpretation of the full sentence is



where P is constrained equationally by virtue of the
interpretation of the source clause:



This equation has a single (most general) solution



It is this value for P that we will apply to bill.
Thus, the interpretation of the full sentence, with ellipsis resolved
is



The assumption may now be discharged, yielding the full
interpretation



This interpretation corresponds to a necessarily
distributive reading, the `individual' reading, in which each person
is simultaneously greeted by John and Bill.

Alternatively, the assumption can be discharged before the ellipsis is
resolved.  Under this scenario, the interpretation of the source clause
is



The full
sentence, then, is interpreted as



where, again, the interpretation of the source clause is
used to constrain the property P:



The single value for Pis



leading to the final interpretation



This interpretation yields a `group' reading paraphrasable
as `John greeted every person when Bill greeted every person.'  The
two derivations, then, correspond to just the interpretations noted by
 Sag. 

 Now, we turn to the superficially similar sentence (). We take the source clause to be the entire sentence, and the target to
be, again, `Bill did'.  The interpretation of the sentence before
resolution of ellipsis and discharge of assumptions is



 (Again, Section  records a derivation for a similar clause.)

As before, we will resolve the ellipsis by finding solutions for the
equation



whose solution assigns
P the relation 

.
With this substitution,
the interpretation is



which, discharging the assumption, reduces to



Alternatively, we might attempt to discharge the assumption before
resolving the ellipsis.  Recall the starting point for the previous
derivation:



Discharging the assumption yields



Resolving the ellipsis, then, involves finding solutions
to the equation



Notice that the variable P appears on both sides of this
equation.  For this reason, the derivation runs into problems, for
there simply are no solutions to this equation; no unifier exists for
this pair of typed terms.   Thus, the derivation fails at this
point; the sentence has only the `individual' reading, in agreement
with our judgments.

The computational reflex of the above lack of a solution is a
violation of the so-called ``occurs check'' in the unification
algorithm. This check prevents the construction of unifiers in which
the substitution for a variable contains that variable. In other
words, the occurs check blocks the creation of a circularity (a value
for P containing P itself). It is interesting to note that this is
formally analogous to the syntactic argumentation which Williams
Williams:DLF uses to eliminate such readings.

In sum, the ellipsis characterization described here allows for
antecedent-contained ellipsis, and predicts correctly the interactions
with quantifier scope.

Another implication of the account of quantifier scope given above is
that in cases where the source clause exhibits quantifier scoping
ambiguities, if the quantifiers are separately quantified in the two
 clauses (i.e., as in the `group' reading for ()) the scopes in the two clauses must be the same.  For instance, in the
sentence

John gave every student a test, and Bill did too.

we predict (correctly, we take it) no reading of the form



where the two quantifiers take different scopes in the two
clauses.   Consider the possible orderings of ellipsis resolution and
discharging of quantifier assumptions.  If ellipsis resolution occurs
before some of the quantifiers have been discharged, these quantifiers
will scope over both clauses.  Thus, the only way for both
quantifiers to scope separately is for ellipsis resolution to occur
after both quantifier assumptions are discharged.  But in that case,
the ellipsis equation will include the quantifier order manifest in
the source clause interpretation, and this will be carried over to the
target interpretation.

In general, the semantic types of parallel elements must be identical.
In the case of a quantified NP parallel to a non-quantified NP, this
implies that the type of the non-quantified NP must be raised to that
of the quantified type.  As an example, we consider the sentence

Every student revised his paper, and then Bill did.

This sentence is ambiguous, depending on whether Bill
revises his own paper or each student's paper.

As usual, the ellipsis resolution can occur before or after the
quantifier assumption is discharged.  If the quantifier is discharged
first, we have the meaning given in 1 for the first clause.




To resolve the ellipsis, we need to set up an equation
involving the interpretation of the parallel element in the source,
``every student''. However, for this purpose we cannot directly use
the stored noun phrase interpretation given in 1.




This interpretation only makes sense as part of the
derivation of the meaning of the whole source clause. Instead, we
calculate the contribution of ``every student'' to the meaning of the
source clause by examining the effect of applying it to an arbitrary
property S.  Combining S with 0, we obtain first the
interpretation in 1.




The assumption can then be discharged to yield the sentence
meaning in 1.

  
every(x, student(x), S(x))

The contribution of ``every student'' is thus to map an
 arbitrary property S to the term in (), that is, the contribution is the function given in 1.

  


It is easy to show that this is equivalent to the usual
generalized quantifier meaning of ``every student''.

To resolve the ellipsis, then, we set up the equation in 1
 involving the meaning () of the parallel element in the source, ``every student'':




This equation has the solution



The type of the noun phrase meaning


is

.
The meaning for ``Bill'' must be
type-raised to 


for type consistency.  The value for
P, when applied to the type-raised meaning for ``Bill'', yields the
target meaning



according to which Bill revises his own paper.

On the other hand, if ellipsis resolution occurs first, the derivation
yields



just before resolution.  The equation



admits of a strict interpretation for P:



The meaning for the conjoined sentence before ellipsis
resolution



reduces, after ellipsis resolution, to



which, following discharging of the quantifier assumption, becomes



On this reading, Bill revises each student's paper after the
student revises it.  A sloppy reading, on which Bill revises his own
paper, is generable in this way as well; in this particular case,
though, it is logically equivalent to the reading described above, in
which type-lifting of `Bill' is involved.

We defer discussion of several other important interactions of
ellipsis and scoping phenomena to a companion paper in preparation.
In that paper we intend to discuss, in addition to a more detailed
explication of the mainstream quantifier cases:

Scope ambiguities with indefinites:
Indefinites give rise to
several readings under ellipsis, depending on their scope and the
relative order of ellipsis resolution and discharge of the indefinite.
This sentence, for example, has three readings:

John lost a book he owned, and so did Bill.

On the first reading, John and Bill lost the same book; on the second
reading, John and Bill each lost one of John's books, possibly
distinct; and on the third reading Bill lost one of his own books.

De dicto/de re ambiguities:
Similar ambiguities are found in
sentences with opaque verbs.  This sentence has three readings:

Bill wants to read a good book and John does too.

Where the first conjunct has a de dicto reading, the second conjunct
does also; where the first conjunct has a de re reading, however,
there are two readings for the sentence as a whole, depending on
whether or not Bill and John want to read the same book.

`Canadian flag' examples:
Hirshbuhler:Ellipsis
discusses examples such as the following:

A Canadian flag was hanging in front of each window, and an American
one was too.

Examples such as these illustrate that the subject of the source
clause need not take widest scope in VP ellipsis.  On our analysis,
 these examples, like those in Section , involve matching of higher than second order.

In order to more fully explicate the differences between our approach
to ellipsis resolution and other approaches, we analyze a single
example in detail from the perspective of several previous proposals.
Rather than make the comparison in the respective notations of the
original proposals, we normalize those notations by using lambda
terms uniformly.  When the analyses are viewed in this way, several
apparently different analyses are seen to generate the same set of
readings in the same manner, despite their having originally been
stated in differing notations.

We will use the following example, discussed at length by Gawron and
Peters GP:Anaph:

 John revised his paper before the teacher did, and Bill did too. 

We follow Gawron and Peters in directing attention to the
reading of the first conjunct where `John' and `his' corefer, and of
the second elliptical clause where its source is the entire previous
sentence.  The following six readings exhaust the set of readings
generated by any of the analyses (including our own) that we discuss.
We present them with paraphrases for reference.

#150
		


		

Each person revised his own paper.

#150
		


		

Each person revised John's paper.

#150
		


		

John and then the teacher revised John's paper; Bill and then
the teacher revised Bill's paper. 

#150
		


		

John and Bill both revised John's paper before the teacher revised the
teacher's paper.

#150
		


		

John and Bill revised their own papers before the teacher
revised John's paper.

#150
		


		

John and then the teacher revised John's paper; Bill revised John's
paper before the teacher revised Bill's paper.  

As we will see, the equational analysis that we propose in
this paper is the most profligate of the analyses, potentially
generating all six of these readings, though restrictions might
eliminate certain of these.

The strictest version of an identity-of-relations analysis
requires that a lambda term used in the derivation of the meaning of
the source clause be used in the derivation of the target clause
meaning (either by copying or deletion under identity).  Under such
an analysis, the pertinent level of semantic representation of the
source clause to use in the target clause derivation is that before
beta reduction has occurred, as beta reduction eliminates the
function-typed lambda terms.  For the sentence `John revised his
paper', the unreduced meaning representation is one of:



or



corresponding to the strict and sloppy readings,
respectively.  In forming the meaning of the first target clause
`before the teacher did', we use whichever term P is made
available by the first clause, generating 

P(teacher).  An issue
remains as to how the two clause meanings are then combined to form a
single sentence meaning.  The most natural method, direct
 coordination, would yield (for the sloppy reading): 



corresponding to a syntactic analysis under which the
adverbial clause is attached at the S level.  However, this is not
itself of the form appropriate for being the source of a later
ellipsis, that is, a function applied to the subject meaning.  Thus,
under this analysis, the second ellipsis, `and Bill did too', would be
uninterpretable.  (Recall that we are ignoring the readings in which
the source for the second ellipsis is merely `John revised his paper'.
Such a reading would be possible, although it would be strict or
sloppy dependent on the interpretation  of the other two
clauses.)

The second ellipsis is not, of course, uninterpretable, so we attempt
to design a meaning representation for its source that is of the
appropriate form.  A first method is to place the meaning of the
`before' clause within the meaning of its source VP:



(We will discuss a second method in
 Section .)  The exact mechanism for constructing such a reading is not specified here.  It may seem especially problematic,
as the source and target terms are not alphabetic variants in this
notation.  Nonetheless, if this were the meaning representation of the
source of the second ellipsis, it would allow for a sloppy reading of
the target; this would correspond to the sloppy
 reading ().  The strict variant 



 would yield reading (). 

An alternative method of subordinating the `before' clause meaning
maintains the alphabetic variance property of the two clauses.  If we
assume, counterintuitively, that the before operator takes a
property and a truth value to a property (that is, it is of type

), we can
form the meaning representation



and similarly for the strict case.  Again, the mechanism is
 a bit mysterious (though less so) and readings ()  and () would be generated for the sentence as a whole. 

The analyses of Sag:PhD and Williams:DLF, although
they do not consider cases such as these, might be reasonably viewed
as generating these readings in much this way.  Similarly, the
analysis presented by Roberts:PhD and phrased in terms of
DRT generates these two readings (as discussed by Gawron and Peters).

The representation for the source of the second ellipsis might be
extrapolated along different lines.  In particular, the interpretation
for each verb phrase, including the compound one, might be given by an
overt abstraction.  This would correspond to a syntactic analysis
under which the adverbial clause is adjoined to the main clause verb
phrase, with one verb phrase meaning appearing as a subconstituent of
 the other.  For the sloppy reading (), we would have 



 and for the strict () 



This representation has the benefit of being uniform,
preserving alphabetic variance, and assigning a more attractive type
to before.  It also allows for a third reading when used as the
 source for the second elliptical clause.  The second argument to revise might be--in addition to j (the strict option) or x (the locally sloppy option)--the reabstracted subject meaning u.  This leads to a globally sloppy meaning (). 



This analysis, which generates three readings for the example
sentence, is essentially the analysis developed by Gawron and Peters
within a situation-theoretic framework. (The final reading corresponds
to the second argument of revise being ``absorbed'' by the
lambda operator.)  Our transliteration makes clear that, for this case
at least, situation-semantics machinery is not necessary to yield the
readings in question; an extrapolation of Sag's or Williams's analyses
might achieve the same result.  Of course, other aspects of the Gawron
and Peters analysis depend intrinsically on the situation-theoretic
foundation.

The three readings provided by the Gawron and Peters analysis seem to
exhaust the possibilities for an identity-of-relations approach.
Our analysis produces six readings for the example sentence.

Let us examine in detail how one of the readings for this sentence,
 () above, is obtained under the equational analysis of ellipsis.  Assume that the semantics for `John revised his paper' is:



The first conjoined sentence then will have the meaning



under the constraint



The second elliptical clause takes its source to be the whole first
conjunction.  Thus, its interpretation will be



under the constraint



These two equations in two unknowns (P and Q) are solved, as
usual, by higher-order unification; we will take the equation for Pfirst.  One solution is to take the strict reading for P,



leading to the following interpretation for the second equation:



This equation, in turn, has a solution



The semantics for this reading of the sentence as a whole is:



Our analysis allows for readings that are missing under the analyses
discussed above because it is not an identity-of-relations analysis;
interpretation of ellipsis does not involve copying the interpretation
of a constituent in the source.

 In Section , we discuss a restriction on unifiers that uniformly eliminates certain readings of elliptical
clauses.  This restriction, when applied to the example at hand,
 eliminates reading ().  Thus, our analysis, strictly speaking, generates only five of the six combinatorially possible
readings of the sentence.

An unpublished analysis attributed to Hans Kamp (personal
communication to Mark Gawron and Stanley Peters, cited by Gawron and
Peters GP:Anaph) and couched in DRT assigns four readings
to the sentence, and does so by eliminating the identity-of-relations
assumption.  In Kamp's analysis, as in our own, ambiguities between
strict and sloppy readings do not arise from ambiguity in the source
clause; the source has only a single interpretation.  Essentially,
Kamp makes a copy of the discourse representation structure of the
source, and then imposes constraints identifying the participants in
the source and target copies. These constraints must be applied in a
symmetric manner.  If a sloppy interpretation constraint applies to
one copied discourse entity, it must apply to all; similarly for a
strict interpretation constraint.  Gawron and Peters mention a
possible extension to Kamp's analysis that allows for the generation
of all six of the readings listed above by relaxing the symmetry
requirement.  We refer the reader to the discussion by Gawron and
Peters for a fuller description of Kamp's proposal.

Insofar as Kamp's analysis can be fleshed out, his analysis and ours
make the same predictions as to the class of readings available in
cases of cascaded ellipsis.  Readings missing under other analyses are
available for our analysis and his.  The particular syntactic
operations that Kamp (under Gawron and Peters's reconstruction)
presupposes have no particular foundation other than efficacy.  Our
analysis can be seen as providing an argument for the operational view
implicit in Kamp's analysis based on the underlying equational
characterization of elliptical constructions.  This equational
foundation, as we have seen, articulates with other semantic phenomena
in ways not appreciated in the previous research.

In summary, each analysis differs in the number of analyses that are
predicted for the given sentence.  Here is a scorecard.

The single reading that our method derives that remains underived by
 others is that in ().  Clearly, this reading is difficult, if not impossible, to dig out (although plausibility
considerations play a large role here).  However, we have seen
examples that demonstrate that the reason for its absence in the other
analyses is faulty.  For instance, its elimination on the basis of an
identity-of-relations analysis, as Roberts or Gawron and Peters would
have it, has repeatedly been seen to be too strong.

Rather, the pertinent distinction in differentiating the first four readings
from the last two is that the resolution of the second elliptical
construction in the last two readings must treat the parallel
structures that ellipsis applies to in a non-parallel fashion.  We
conjecture that such non-parallel cases are highly dispreferred, if
not disallowed entirely.

In order to test this hypothesis, we can try to construct an example
which pragmatically favors this dispreferred reading to see whether it
is obtainable.  The following sentence is parallel in structure to
 sentence (): 
Dewey announced his victory after the newspapers did, but so did Truman.

A reasonable, historically accurate reading
for this sentence may be represented as:


'

'

'

'



That is, Dewey claimed victory for himself after the newspapers
announced Dewey's victory, but Truman also claimed victory after Dewey
was announced the winner by the newspapers.  This reading is parallel
 to reading () described above. 

Opinions differ as to the acceptability of this reading.  One's
opinion in this case can be seen as a litmus determining whether
parallelism of the sort violated here is required, or merely
preferred.

The following issues are problematic for most analyses of ellipsis
interpretation.  We present them, along with our conjectured
solutions, to codify the range of phenomena that analyses of ellipsis
might account for and to provide a preliminary guess as to their
possible solutions in our framework.

Our analysis of ellipsis resolution presupposes identification of the
source of the ellipsis and the parallel structuring of the source and
target.  This division of labor between identification of parallelism
and resolution of ellipsis is purposeful, as the factors involved in
the solution of the two problems are quite different.  Although
determining the parallelism may seem to be a purely syntactic
operation, much like the matching that goes on at the semantic level,
this similarity is illusory.  Cases of semantic or pragmatic
parallelism also exist.  These cases are particularly
problematic for theories of ellipsis in which the interpretation of an
elided phrase is presumed to correspond to the interpretation of some
syntactic constituent in the source clause, as is the case in most
identity-of-relations analyses.

Examples of ellipsis exist in which the parallelism is between the
``logical subject'' (i.e., passive agent) in the source clause and the
surface subject in the target clause:

A lot of this material can be presented in a fairly informal
and accessible fashion, and often I do.  

It should be noted, as Dummett does, 
(example due to Ivan Sag)

Similar examples involving ``so-anaphora'' are also
found:

The formalisms are thus more aptly referred to as information- or
constraint-based rather than unification-based, and we will do so
here. 

It is possible that this result can be derived from some
independent principle, but I know of no theory that does so.


Examples of this type are ubiquitous, but seem
to be confined pragmatically to cases where the source clause states a
general fact or rule, and the target clause provides a specific
instance of this fact or rule.

Examples of passive/active parallelism are not confined
to those in which the source and target appear in the main clause.  In
the following example (due to ),
parallelism of the heads of the main clause subjects forces a
parallelism of arguments of the modifying relative clauses; John, the object of the relative clause in the source sentence, is
parallel to Bill, the subject of the relative clause in the
target sentence:

The policeman who arrested John failed to read him his rights, and
so, for that matter, did the one Bill got collared by.

Our analysis does not require that the property provided as the
interpretation for the elided portion of the target clause in examples
like those above correspond to the interpretation of any constituent
in the source clause.  It is not clear that there is any analysis
available for examples of this sort within a theory in which the
interpretation for elided phrases must be that of some constituent in
the source clause, as is the case in most identity-of-relations
analyses.

Other cases of semantic/thematic parallelism can also
arise; sentence 1 is from instructions on a bottle of Agree
shampoo:

Avoid getting shampoo in eyes--if it does, flush
thoroughly with water.

Syntactically, the parallel elements are the object of the
source clause and the subject of the target; thematically, these
elements are the ``theme'' arguments of the intransitive/causative
get verb pair.

Other combinations of logical-subject/surface-subject parallelism do
not seem to arise.  The following examples, where the parallel
elements are intended to be the surface subject in the source clause
and the logical subject in the target, are ungrammatical:

Dummett notes, as it should be, 

We will refer to the formalisms as information- or
constraint-based, as they more aptly are.

However, the following sentence (due to Peter Sells) has a
similar structure, yet seems to be more acceptable:

John completed the assignment faster than it ever had been in the
history of the school.

To the extent that this sentence is grammatical, it
illustrates that either the source or target clause can contain a
logical subject which is parallel to a surface subject in the other
clause.  Although examples such as these are often
restricted in their distribution, they demonstrate that the
parallelism between elements in the source and target clause need not
be confined to surface syntactic parallelism.

More extreme cases exist in which arbitrary information may need to be
brought to bear to determine the appropriate parallelism between
source and target.   cites some such
cases:

 Irv and Mary want to dance together but Mary can't since her husband is here.

Mary wants to go to Spain and Fred wants to go to Peru, but because
of limited resources, only one of them can.

Recovery of the pertinent properties in these
sentences requires nonlinguistic knowledge concerning social norms and
 economic processes.  In example (), for instance, the implicit property that only one of Mary and Fred can
have is to do what he or she wants to do.  Other attested
 examples include: 

Fortunately, the first person to die in 1990 and the
first couple to file for divorce in 1990 were allowed to do so
anonymously.  []

Amid applause at the Congress of the   Russian
Federation (RSFSR), Mr. Yeltsin put forward a bill setting Russian law
above the law of the Soviet Union - something Mr. Gorbachev, as
Soviet president, declared unconstitutional when Estonia, Latvia and
Lithuania did it last year.  []

Sentences of this sort illustrate that, to a greater or lesser extent,
relations involved in the resolution of anaphoric processes such as
ellipsis can be made available contextually.  Identity-of-relations
analyses allow for only the simplest cases of resolution of elided
constituents, since the only mechanism that is available to provide an
interpretation for the target is that of copying an interpretation
from the source.  Our approach goes beyond identity-of-relations
analyses by allowing for the construction of new relations on the
basis of old ones; the use of unification to construct relations is,
as we have seen, more powerful and more flexible than copying.

Even for cases of what  call ``surface
anaphora'', such as verb phrase ellipsis, resolution is possible to
relations that are pragmatically determined or influenced, as the
 examples in () show.  To interpret these examples, not only the apparatus we introduce for constructing new
relations but also pragmatic knowledge must be brought to bear.

Cases in which sloppy but not strict readings are available might seem
to be problematic for an analysis like the one presented here.  Below
we will examine cases of control and reflexivization in which
exclusively sloppy readings are available.  Solutions will be proposed
which do not involve constraining the process by which relations are
formed as interpretations for elided constituents.

However, there are other cases in which readings are unexpectedly
unavailable; these cases generally involve multiple occurrences of
pronouns whose antecedent is a parallel element in the source clause.
It seems that a constraint is necessary on the possibilities for
forming relations in cases such as these.

In general, only sloppy readings are available for sentences involving
control.  The following sentence is not ambiguous:

John tried to run, and Bill did too.

There is no reading according to which Bill tries to bring
it about that John runs.

Chierchia , noting facts of
this type, proposes that the semantic type of a controlled verb phrase
is a property rather than a proposition.  That is, for a sentence like
``John tried to run'', the correct semantic representation would be
(a) and not (b):

[a.] 



[b.] 

try(john,run(john))

If Chierchia's hypothesis is correct, the lack of a strict
reading is predicted; in the representation in (a), there is only a
single occurrence of ``john'', and a strict reading is impossible to
produce.

However, there are reasons to doubt the adequacy of an analysis like
this one.  First, anaphors whose antecedent is the subject of a
controlled VP can give rise to both a sloppy and a strict reading
under ellipsis.  Consider this sentence:

 John tried to kill himself before Bill did. 

Since the reflexive ``himself'' cannot be bound to a higher
clause subject, its antecedent must be the subject of ``kill''.  On the
property analysis, the interpretation for the first conjunct would
then be:

  


However, we find this sentence to have two readings, corresponding to
 the following paraphrases: 

[a.] John tried to kill himself before Bill tried to kill himself.

[b.] John tried to kill himself before Bill tried to kill John.

The second of these readings would not be obtainable
 given () as the source clause meaning. 

 demonstrates another problem for Chierchia's
property analysis.  The data she cites bear on Chierchia's claim that
there is a correlation between the syntactic form and the semantic
type of complements: that complements of type VP are properties, while
complements of type S' are propositions.  Chierchia predicts that
there would be no case in which an S' complement gives rise to only
a sloppy reading.

Zec discusses cases of obligatory control in Serbo-Croatian, showing
that there are cases of obligatory control into verbal complements
that are of the syntactic category S' rather than VP.  For example,
the verb pokusati ``try'' takes an S' complement, and
yet only a sloppy reading is possible in the following sentence
 :

 PetarPetar jeAux
pokusaotried
dathat
postanebecome
predsednikpresident
aand
toit
jeAux
pokusalatried
itoo
MarijaMarija
``Petar tried to become president and Marija tried it too.''

This sentence means that Marija tried to bring it about that
Marija (not Petar) become president.

There seem to be two possibilities with regard to the Serbo-Croatian
data.  The first is to deny that there is a necessary correlation
between the syntactic type of the complement and its semantic type.
The claim would be in that case that, although the syntactic type of
the complement of ``try'' is an S' in Serbo-Croatian, semantically
it is a property.  In that case, the lack of a strict reading would be
predicted for the Serbo-Croatian case, just as it is for the English
 case; the problem illustrated by example () would remain, however.

Another option, and the one that Zec takes, is to posit an obligatory
coreference relation between the subject of ``try'' and the subject of
its complement clause; this relation would presumably be induced by
the control verb.  If this option is taken, it would presumably force
the abstraction of both arguments at the same time under second-order
matching.

In our terms, the obligatory coreference relation and the obligatory
sloppy readings Zec discusses would mean that controlled occurrences
are primary in both Serbo-Croatian and English.  Thus,
 in (), the interpretation would be 



which, when taken to be a source for ellipsis, would
generate only two solutions to the equation



manifesting a sloppy reading for the controlled subject
occurrence and either a strict or a sloppy reading for the reflexive
occurrence, as required.

 present a number of cases of reflexivization
 in which only sloppy readings are available.  The Dutch reflexive zich  is such a case :

ZijShe
verdedigdedefended
zichherself
beterbetter
danthan
PeterPeter
``She defended herself better than Peter.''

Sells et al. characterize reflexive constructions involving
only sloppy readings as ``closed predicate'' constructions.  They
discuss only examples in which the reflexive appears in object
position, with its antecedent being the subject of the same clause.

We might assume, then, that for the examples they discuss, the
presence of the reflexive correlates with the operation of a semantic
relation-reducing rule, one which semantically ``intransitivizes'' the
verb.  In the Dutch case, then, the presence of zich signals a
change in the meaning of the verb from the meaning in (a) to the one
in (b):

[a.] 



[b.] 



A solution of this type would work for all cases of
obligatory sloppy readings for reflexives that are described by Sells
et al., since they consider only cases where the reflexive and its
antecedent are arguments of the same predicate, in which a
relation-reducing operation can apply.

However, this solution would be inappropriate in cases where the
reflexive and its antecedent are clearly arguments of different
predicates, where a relation-reducing operation cannot apply.
Although such cases are difficult to find, it may be that the
Serbo-Croatian reflexive sebe (genitive svoje) is such a
case.

The following sentence has only a sloppy reading (Draga Zec, personal
communication):

PetarPetar
jeAux
sakriohid
stoone
hiljadahundred
dolaradollars
ispodunderneath
svojeself's
kucehouse
aand
tothat
jeAux
uciniodid
ialso
PavlePavle
``Petar hid one hundred dollars underneath self's house, and Paul did
(that) too.''

The only reading available for this sentence is that Paul
hid one hundred dollars under his own house.

We postulate that the reflexive sebe in Serbo-Croatian engenders
primary as opposed to secondary occurrences, which would then be
subject to the primary occurrence constraint. This would also be true
of the English reflexive for those speakers who find that strict
readings with reflexives are unacceptable.

In short, a variety of syntactic constructions give rise to multiple
primary occurrences of parallel elements: control, both of the type
seen in English and of the type seen in Serbo-Croatian, and
reflexivization in some dialects of English and in Serbo-Croatian.

In cases where there are two pronouns coreferent with the
parallel element in the source, one might expect that each pronoun
would give rise to either a strict or a sloppy reading, giving a
total of four readings for the target clause.  This does not seem to
be the case, however; one of the readings is systematically missing.

 notes that the following sentence, with two
occurrences of pronouns in the source clause, has only three and not
four interpretations:

 [a.] Bill believed that he loved his wife, and Harry did too. 

[b.] Harry believed that Bill loved Bill's wife.

[b''.] Harry believed that Harry loved Harry's wife.

[b''.] Harry believed that Harry loved Bill's wife.

[b'''.]  Harry believed that Bill loved Harry's wife.

In this case, the missing reading corresponds to the following unifier
 for (): 

  





Other examples illustrate a similar phenomenon.
 observes that this sentence has only three
readings, not four:

 [a.] Edith said that finding her husband nude had upset her, and Martha did too.

[b.] Martha said that finding Martha's husband nude had upset
Martha.

[b'.] Martha said that finding Edith's husband nude had upset
Edith.

[b''.] Martha said that finding Edith's husband nude had upset
Martha.

[b'''.]  Martha said that finding Martha's husband nude
had upset Edith.

The interpretation paraphrased in 0b''' is missing.
The unifier for P for the missing reading is:







 Examples () and () illustrate a  constraint on relation formation.  In example (), the position corresponding to the pronoun ``his'' may not be
abstracted unless the position corresponding to ``he'' is also
abstracted.  The constraint does not seem to correlate with linear
 order of the pronouns, though; in example () the position corresponding to the rightmost pronoun may not be abstracted
unless the position corresponding to the leftmost pronoun is also
 abstracted.  The reverse is true in example (), however, where it is the position corresponding to the rightmost pronoun that
must be extracted.

Although these examples show that the proper generalization about the
ordering between pronominal positions does not have to do with linear
order, they are consistent with the hypothesis that the ordering
correlates with depth of syntactic embedding.  In both
 example () and example (), if the position corresponding to a more deeply embedded pronoun is abstracted
over, the position corresponding to a less deeply embedded pronoun
must also be abstracted over.

 However, example () shows that the ordering between positions may not be dependent on syntactic facts at all.
 Recall that sentence (), repeated here, was not associated  with the reading in (), paraphrased  in (): 

 John revised his paper before the teacher did, and Bill did too. 

#150
		


		

John and then the teacher revised John's paper; Bill revised John's
paper before the teacher revised Bill's paper.

On the excluded reading, the source clause is ``John revised
his paper before the teacher did'', and the target clause is ``Bill
did too''.  ``John'' and ``Bill'' are the parallel elements.  The
unifier for P for this reading is:






These various missing readings can be captured by positing a linking
relationship between the semantics of pronouns and that of their
antecedents, and generalizing it to include the relation between the
semantics of terms induced by ellipsis and that of their source
parallel element.  Under a suitable definition of this generalized
antecedent linking, all of the cases here can be captured by requiring
that if an occurrence is abstracted over, so must its generalized
antecedent.

Finally, we turn to some simple examples that seem to lack any
readings whatsoever.  Consider the following examples, where ``Mary''
 is taken to be the antecedent of ``she'': 


John gave Mary everything she did.


John likes Mary, and she does too.

These judgments would follow from an analysis on which
syntactic structure is copied from the source to the target, as the
sentences with copies in place violate constraints on binding.


John gave Mary everything shei gave Maryi.


John likes Mary, and shei likes Maryi too.

However, a simple copying analysis faces problems in accounting for
grammatical examples of similar structure:

John got to Suei's apartment before shei did.

John voted for Suei because shei told him to.

On a copying analysis, these examples would be incorrectly predicted
to be ungrammatical, just as their copied versions are:

*John got to Suei's apartment before shei got to Suei's
apartment.

*John voted for Suei because shei told him to vote for Suei.

The resolution of this puzzle remains an open
question, as does its incorporation in the present analysis; for
discussion of the problem, see .

Another example that seems to argue for a quite superficial analysis
of ellipsis is the following, due to Yoshihisa Kitagawa (personal
communication to Peter Sells):

John thinks that Mary will revise his paper before Bill
will.

on the reading in which Mary revises John's paper and Bill
revises his own paper.  We find the intuition questionable, but it is
clearly problematic for our (and many others') analysis if the reading
is deemed to be available.

Finally, examples which seem to argue for the presence of a gap in the
ellipsis site include the following:

*John met everyone that Peter wondered when he could.
 , p. 511] 

 *Tom visited everyone who told Sue where to. , p. 218] 

On the assumption that long-distance dependencies are
syntactically constrained and that subjacency violations involve an
improper syntactic relation between a filler and a gap, these examples
indicate that the ellipsis site contains a gap at syntactic structure.

The underlying idea in the analysis of ellipsis that we have presented
here--namely, the construction of higher-order equations on the basis
of parallel structures, and their solution by unification--has been
exemplified primarily by the verb-phrase ellipsis construction.
However, many other elliptical phenomena and related phenomena subject
to multiple readings akin to the strict and sloppy readings discussed
here may be analyzed using the same techniques.  The ambiguities in
cleft sentences such as

It is Dan who loves his wife.

and interpretation of ``only'' with respect to its focus, as in

Only Dan loves his wife.

as well as more standard elliptical phenomena such as
stripping and comparative deletion can be analyzed in this way as
well, making a broad range of predictions as to the space of possible
readings and their interaction with other semantic phenomena.  It
remains for future work to test these potential applications more
fully.

We adduce three advantages of the analysis of elliptical constructions
presented here over previous alternatives.  First, it is in certain
respects simpler, in that it requires no postulation of otherwise
unmotivated ambiguities in the source clause.  Second, it is more
accurate in its predictions, especially in allowing readings
disallowed in identity-of-relations analyses.  Third, it is
methodologically preferable in that the analysis follows directly from
a semantic statement of the ellipsis problem with little stipulation.
The operation on which it relies, higher-order unification, is
semantically sound in that the results it produces are determined by
the meanings of phrases directly rather than by the form of the
representations encoding those meanings, as operations of deletion or
copying of portions of such representations are.

We would like to thank the following people for helpful discussion:
Hiyan Alshawi, Sam Bayer, Joan Bresnan, Mark Gawron, Kris Halvorsen,
Dan Hardt, Julia Hirschberg, David Israel, Mark Johnson, Ron Kaplan,
Lauri Karttunen, Shalom Lappin, Richard Larson, Peter Ludlow, John
Maxwell, Richard Oehrle, Stanley Peters, Hub Prust, Steve Pulman, Mats
Rooth, Ivan Sag, Peter Sells, Gregory Ward, Michael Wescoat, Annie
Zaenen, Draga Zec, and two anonymous reviewers.  The written comments
alone that we received prior to publication ran to well over 50 pages,
longer, in fact, than the paper itself.  We regret that we could not
include discussion of all the important issues that they raised.

=

Johan van Benthem.
1989.
Categorial grammar and type theory.
Journal of Philosophical Logic.
To appear.

Gennaro Chierchia.
1983.
Outline of a semantic theory of (obligatory) control.
In Michael Barlow, Daniel Flickinger, and Michael Wescoat, editors,
  Proceedings of the West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics 2, pages
  19-31. Stanford Linguistics Association, Stanford University.

Gennaro Chierchia.
1984.
Anaphoric properties of infinitives and gerunds.
In Mark Cobler, Susannah MacKaye, and Michael Wescoat, editors,
  Proceedings of the West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics 3, pages
  28-39. Stanford Linguistics Association, Stanford University.

Gennaro Chierchia.
1988.
Dynamic generalized quantifiers and donkey anaphora.
In M. Krifka, editor, Proceedings of the 1988 Tbingen
  Conference. Seminar fr Natrliche-Sprachiche Systeme der
  Universitt Tbingen, November.

Robin Cooper.
1983.
Quantification and Syntactic Theory, volume 21 of Synthese
  Language Library.
D. Reidel, Dordrecht.

sten Dahl.
1972.
On so-called `sloppy identity'.
In Gothenburg Papers in Theoretical Linguistics, volume 11.
  University of Gteborg.

sten Dahl.
1974.
How to open a sentence: Abstraction in natural language.
In Logical Grammar Reports, No. 12. University of
  Gteborg.

Robert Fiengo and Robert May.
1990.
Anaphora and ellipsis.
 MS, City University of New York and University of California,
  Irvine.

Harvey Friedman.
1975.
Equality between functionals.
In R. Parikh, editor, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 453, pages
  22-37. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany.

Mark Gawron and Stanley Peters.
1990.
Anaphora and quantification in Situation Semantics.
CSLI/University of Chicago Press, Stanford University.
CSLI Lecture Notes, Number 19.

Gerald Gazdar, Ewan Klein, Geoffrey K. Pullum, and Ivan A. Sag.
1985.
Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

J. Groenendijk and M. Stockhof.
1987.
Dynamic Montague Grammar.
Paper presented at the Workshop on Discourse Representation Theory,
  Stuttgart, West Germany, December.

Isabelle Hak.
1985.
The Syntax of Operators.
Ph.D. thesis, MIT.

Isabelle Hak.
1987.
Bound VPs that need to be.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 10:503-530.

Jorge Hankamer and Ivan A. Sag.
1976.
Deep and surface anaphora.
Linguistic Inquiry, 7(3):391-428.

Irene Heim.
1982.
The Semantics of Definite and Indefinite Noun Phrases.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Massachusetts-Amherst.

Lars Hellan.
1988.
Anaphora in Norwegian and the Theory of Grammar.
Foris Publications, Dordrecht.

J. Roger Hindley and Jonathon P. Seldin.
1986.
Introduction to Combinators and -Calculus.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England.

Julia Hirschberg and Gregory Ward.
1991.
Accent and bound anaphora.
Cognitive Linguistics.
To appear.

Paul Hirshbhler.
1982.
VP deletion and across-the-board quantifier scope.
In James Pustejovsky and Peter Sells, editors, Proceedings of
  NELS 12. GLSA, University of Massachusetts-Amherst.

Jerry R. Hobbs and Stuart M. Shieber.
1987.
An algorithm for generating quantifier scopings.
Computational Linguistics, 13:47-63.

Grard Huet and Bernard Lang.
1978.
Proving and applying program transformations expressed with
  second-order patterns.
Acta Informatica, 11(1):31-55.

Grard Huet.
1975.
A unification algorithm for typed 

-calculus.
Theoretical Computer Science, 1:27-57.

Ray S. Jackendoff.
1972.
Semantic Interpretation in Generative Grammar.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Hans Kamp.
1981.
A theory of truth and semantic representation.
In Jeroen Groenendijk, Theo Janssen, and Martin Stokhof, editors,
  Formal Methods in the Study of Language, pages 277-321, Amsterdam.
  Mathematical Centre.

Yoshihisa Kitagawa.
1991.
Copying identity.
Natural Language and Linguistic Theory.
To appear.

Joachim Lambek.
1980.
From -calculus to cartesian closed categories.
In J.P. Seldin and J.R. Hindley, editors, To H.B. Curry: Essays
  on Combinatory Logic, Lambda Calculus and Formalism, pages 375-402.
  Academic Press, London.

Shalom Lappin.
1984.
VP anaphora, quantifier scope, and logical form.
Linguistic Analysis, 13(4):273-315.

Fernando C. N. Pereira.
1990.
Categorial semantics and scoping.
Computational Linguistics, 16(1):1-10.

S. G. Pulman.
1988.
A contextual reasoning and cooperative response framework for the
  Core Language Engine.
Internal report, SRI Cambridge, Cambridge, England.

Tanya Reinhart.
1983.
Anaphora and Semantic Interpretation.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Craige Roberts.
1987.
Modal Subordination, Anaphora, and Distributivity.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Massachusetts-Amherst.

Ivan A. Sag.
1976.
Deletion and Logical Form.
Ph.D. thesis, MIT.

Traugott Scheibe.
1973.
Zum Problem der grammatisch relevanten Identitt.
In F. Kiefer and N. Ruwet, editors, Generative Grammar in
  Europe, pages 482-527. D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht.

Len Schubert and F J. Pelletier.
1982.
From English to logic: Context-free computation of `conventional'
  logical translations.
American Journal of Computational Linguistics, 10:165-176.
Reprinted in Grosz et al., 1986.

Peter Sells, Annie Zaenen, and Draga Zec.
1987.
Reflexivization variation: Relations between syntax, semantics, and
  lexical structure.
In Masayo Iida, Stephen Wechsler, and Draga Zec, editors,   Working Papers in Grammatical Theory and Discourse Structure, pages
  169-238. CSLI/University of Chicago Press, Stanford University.
CSLI Lecture Notes, Number 11.

Mark J. Steedman.
1990.
Gapping as constituent coordination.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 13(2):207-263.

Bonnie Lynn Webber.
1978.
A Formal Approach to Discourse Anaphora.
Ph.D. thesis, Harvard University.

Michael Wescoat.
1989.
Sloppy readings with embedded antecedents.
 MS, Stanford University.

Edwin Williams.
1977.
Discourse and logical form.
Linguistic Inquiry, 8(1):101-139.

Draga Zec.
1987.
On obligatory control in clausal complements.
In Masayo Iida, Stephen Wechsler, and Draga Zec, editors,   Working Papers in Grammatical Theory and Discourse Structure, pages
  139-168. CSLI/University of Chicago Press, Stanford University.
CSLI Lecture Notes, Number 11.



  We emphasize
that although the bulk of the examples in this paper involve VP
ellipsis, the techniques can be applied to the semantic interpretation
of many other elliptical constructions.  This is in part because we do
not restrict the notion of parallel elements to the subjects of the
source and target clauses (see
 Section ).  Indeed, the parallelism between the clauses need not even be purely syntactic (see
 Section ).  The generality of this ellipsis resolution method is one of its primary advantages.
   For brevity, we represent the semantic interpretation of `Dan's wife' in this case as

;
the important thing to note about this representation
is that the semantics of the pronoun `his' is identical to that of its
antecedent, `Dan'.  Any other notation that has this property would do
as well here.  In particular, a treatment of possessives as
introducing bound variables along the lines of the quantifier
assumptions described in
 Section  is possible and perhaps preferable.  Notations such as 


can be thought
of as abbreviatory of such analyses.  We only use such notations for
cases in which the space of readings generated is unaffected.
  The use
of higher-order unification to resolve elliptical constructions has
been independently noted by other researchers.  Pulman and Milward
implemented a prototype system that handled simple cases of VP
 ellipsis and gapping along these lines .  Pareschi and Steedman's ``left conjunct decomposition'' operation, which is
used for the parsing of gapping constructions, bears a certain
resemblance to higher-order unification as well
 . 
  At this point, we can
ignore the distinction between primary and secondary occurrences.
  Since multiple
occurrences of the same proper name do not necessarily co-denote, we
will use different constants as the representations of the denotata of
such occurrences.  For instance, the interpretation of the sentence

[(a)]Dan likes Dan's wife.

should be 


where dan1 and dan2 are separate constants that only
contingently co-denote.  As a consequence, an ellipsis like

[(b)]Dan likes Dan's wife, and Bill does too.

has only a strict reading, which accords with conventional
wisdom.
  Solutions involving
vacuous abstraction, such as



are ruled out where
necessary as special cases of this more general constraint.
A direct prohibition against vacuous abstraction might be
too strong, since verb phrase ellipsis is possible even in cases where
the subject of the source clause is pleonastic and makes no
semantic contribution (examples due to Ivan Sag):

John said it would rain, and it did.
John said there would be trouble, and there was.

Suppose the interpretation of the former example (ignoring
tense and aspect as usual) were



Then the
second-order matching problem induced by the ellipsis would be



(We use the symbol 
for specifying the
interpretation of pleonastic elements, following 
.)  The requirement of abstraction of primary
occurrences would still allow a binding for P involving vacuous
abstraction, namely 

.
The elliptical clause would
therefore be interpreted as rain.
  We are
indebted to an anonymous reviewer for this example.
  The
incorporation of an ellipsis analysis such as ours into a
transformational framework is quite conceivable, merely requiring the
ability to form abstractions over the syntactic objects representing
semantic construals of sentences, that is, LF trees.  The intrinsic
portion of the analysis is its use of an equational framework for
declaratively characterizing ellipsis resolution, not its use of
particular logics for the representation of meanings.  Nonetheless,
the use of typed lambda calculus allows us to directly state our
analysis with a minimum of extraneous machinery.
  Formally similar store elements have been used in
quantifier scoping systems such as those of Schubert and Pelletier
SchubertPelletier82 and Hobbs and Shieber
.
  Dynamic Montague
 grammar , provides a more complex and possibly more general approach to incorporating
some of the aspects of DRT into a compositional framework.
  See
 Footnote  for a discussion of the status of the function symbols pwi and phone.
  Other analyses of polarity, for
instance as an implicit argument of the predicate, will yield similar
results.
  For simplicity of exposition, we ignore
the fact that the polarities of the two sentences differ.  See
 Section  for a discussion of this issue. 
  As the
semantic roles for `Bill' are parasitic on those for `John', we let
the primary occurrences of `Bill' be determined by those of `John' in
the source sentence.
  Sag uses the
notation 


to represent the application of a VP
meaning 


to the subject meaning a.  The scope of
the negation operator is the entire predication.
   proposes a combination of
Cooper storage and copying for interpreting sentences such as
 ().  His scheme differs substantively from ours in that he copies both matrix and store from the storage counterpart to
give the interpretation of the elided material.  However, such a
scheme fails to preserve the scope parallelism noted in
 Section . 
  Here and
elsewhere, we uniformly rename bound variables apart for clarity.
  We are indebted to James McCawley and
Bonnie Webber for bringing these examples to our attention.
  Additional readings arise if the
source clause for the ellipsis is taken to be not the matrix ``John
tried to kill himself'', but the VP complement ``to kill himself'':
[(a)]
John tried to kill himself before Bill killed himself.
[(b)]
John tried to kill himself before Bill killed John.

Similar comments apply to these examples.
  Examples of this
type are due to .
