                     Copyright 1996 Times Mirror Company   
                               Los Angeles Times

                    October 28, 1996, Monday,  Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1632 words

HEADLINE: THE CUTTING EDGE; 
IMPROBABLE INSPIRATION; 
THE FUTURE OF SOFTWARE MAY LIE IN THE OBSCURE THEORIES OF AN 18TH
CENTURY CLERIC
NAMED THOMAS BAYES

BYLINE: LESLIE HELM, TIMES STAFF WRITER 

DATELINE: SEATTLE

BODY:


   When Microsoft Senior Vice President Steve Ballmer first heard his
company was planning to make a huge investment in an Internet service
offering movie reviews and local entertainment information in major
cities across the nation, he went to Chairman Bill Gates with his
concerns.

   After all, Ballmer has billions of dollars of his own money in
Microsoft stock, and entertainment isn't exactly the company's strong
point.

   But Gates dismissed such reservations. Microsoft's competitive
advantage, he responded, was its expertise in "Bayesian networks."

   Asked recently when computers would finally begin to understand
   human speech, Gates began discussing the critical role of "Bayesian"
systems.

   Ask any other software executive about anything "Bayesian" and
   you're liable to get a blank stare.

   Is Gates onto something? Is this alien-sounding technology
Microsoft's new secret weapon?

   Quite possibly.

   Bayesian networks are complex diagrams that organize the body of
knowledge in any given area by mapping out cause-and-effect
relationships among key variables and encoding them with numbers that
represent the extent to which one variable is likely to affect
another.

   Programmed into computers, these systems can automatically generate
optimal predictions or decisions even when key pieces of information
are missing.

   When Microsoft in 1993 hired Eric Horvitz, David Heckerman and Jack
Breese, pioneers in the development of Bayesian systems, colleagues in
the field were surprised.. The field was still an obscure, largely
academic enterprise.
		     
		     
		     Los Angeles Times, October 28, 1996

   Today the field is still obscure. But scratch the surface of a range
of new Microsoft products and you're likely to find Bayesian networks
embedded in the software. And Bayesian nets are being built into models
that are used to predict oil and stock prices, control the space
shuttle and diagnose disease.

   Artificial intelligence (AI) experts, who saw their field
   discredited in the early 1980s after promising a wave of "thinking"
computers that they ultimately couldn't produce, believe widening
acceptance of the Bayesian approach could herald a renaissance in the
field.

   Bayesian networks provide "an overarching graphical framework" that
brings together diverse elements of AI and increases the range of its
likely application to the real world, says Michael Jordon, professor of
brain and cognitive science at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.

   Microsoft is unquestionably the most aggressive in exploiting the
   new approach. The company offers a free Web service that helps
customers diagnose printing problems with their computers and
recommends the quickest way to resolve them. Another Web service helps
parents diagnose their children's health problems.

   The latest version of Microsoft Office software uses the technology
to offer a user help based on past experience, how the mouse is being
moved and what task is being done.

   "If his actions show he is distracted, he is likely to need help,"
Horvitz says. "If he's been working on a chart, chances are he needs
help formatting the chart."

   "Gates likes to talk about how computers are now deaf, dumb, blind
and clueless. The Bayesian stuff helps deal with the clueless part,"
says Daniel T.  Ling, director of Microsoft's research division and a
former IBM scientist.

   Bayesian networks get their name from the Rev. Thomas Bayes, who
wrote an essay, posthumously published in 1763, that offered a
mathematical formula for calculating probabilities among several
variables that are causally related but for which--unlike calculating
the probability of a coin landing on heads or tails--the relationships
can't easily be derived by experimentation.

   Early students of probability applied the ideas to discussions about
the existence of God or efforts to improve their odds in gambling. Much
later, social scientists used it to help clarify the key factors
influencing a particular event.

   But it was the rapid progress in computer power and the development
of key mathematical equations that made it possible for the first time,
in the late 1980s, to compute Bayesian networks with enough variables
that they were useful in practical applications.

   The Bayesian approach filled a void in the decades-long effort to
   add intelligence to computers.

   In the late 1970s and '80s, reacting to the "brute force" approach
   to problem solving by early users of computers, proponents of the
emerging field of artificial intelligence began developing software
programs using rule-based,
		    
		    Los Angeles Times, October 28, 1996

if-then propositions. But the systems took time to put together and
didn't work well if, as was frequently the case, you couldn't answer
all the computer's questions clearly.

   Later companies began using a technique called "neural nets" in
   which a computer would be presented with huge amounts of data on a
particular problem and programmed to pull out patterns. A computer fed
with a big stack of X-rays and told whether or not cancer was present
in each case would pick out patterns that would then be used to
interpret X-rays.

   But the neural nets won't help predict the unforeseen. You can't
train a neural net to identify an incoming missile or plane because you
could never get sufficient data to train the system.

   In part because of these limitations, a slew of companies that
   popped up in the early 1980s to sell artificial intelligence systems
virtually all went bankrupt.

   Many AI techniques continued to be used. Credit card companies, for
example, began routinely using neural networks to pick out transactions
that don't look right based on a consumer's past behavior. But
increasingly, AI was regarded as a tool with limited use.

   Then, in the late 1980s--spurred by the early work of Judea Pearl, a
professor of computer science at UCLA, and breakthrough mathematical
equations by Danish researchers--AI researchers discovered that
Bayesian networks offered an efficient way to deal with the lack or
ambiguity of information that has hampered previous systems.

   Horvitz and his two Microsoft colleagues, who were then classmates
   at Stanford University, began building Bayesian networks to help
diagnose the condition of patients without turning to surgery.

   The approach was efficient, says Horvitz, because you could combine
historical data, which had been meticulously gathered, with the less
precise but more intuitive knowledge of experts on how things work to
get the optimal answer given the information available at a given
time.

   Horvitz, who with two colleagues founded Knowledge Industries to
develop tools for developing Bayesian networks, says he and the others
left the company to join Microsoft in part because they wanted to see
their theoretical work more broadly applied.

   Although the company did important work for the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration and on medical diagnostics, Horvitz says,
"It's not like your grandmother will use it."

   Microsoft's activities in the field are now helping to build a
groundswell of support for Bayesian ideas.

   "People look up to Microsoft," says Pearl, who wrote one of the key
early texts on Bayesian networks in 1988 and has become an unofficial
spokesman for the field. "They've given a boost to the whole area."

	Los Angeles Times, October 28, 1996

   A researcher at German conglomerate Siemens says Microsoft's work
   has drawn the attention of his superiors, who are now looking
seriously at applying Bayesian concepts to a range of industrial
applications.

   Scott Musman, a computer consultant in Arlington, Va., recently
designed a Bayesian network for the Navy that can identify enemy
missiles, aircraft or vessels and recommend which weapons could be used
most advantageously against incoming targets.

   Musman says previous attempts using traditional mathematical
approaches on state-of-the-art computers would get the right answer but
would take two to three minutes.

   "But you only have 30 seconds before the missile has hit you," says
Musman.

   General Electric is using Bayesian techniques to develop a system
that will take information from sensors attached to an engine and,
based on expert opinion built into the system as well as vast amounts
of data on past engine performance, pinpoint emerging problems.

   Microsoft is working on techniques that will enable the Bayesian
networks to "learn" or update themselves automatically based on new
knowledge, a task that is currently cumbersome.

   The company is also working on using Bayesian techniques to improve
upon popular AI approaches such as "data mining" and "collaborative
filtering" that help draw out relevant pieces of information from
massive databases. The latter will be used by Microsoft in its new
online entertainment service to help people identify the kind of
restaurants or entertainment they are most likely to enjoy.

   Still, as effective as they are proving to be in early use, Bayesian
networks face an uphill battle in gaining broad acceptance.

   "An effective solution came just as the bloom had come off the AI
rose," says Peter Hart, head of Ricoh's California Research Center at
Menlo Park, a pioneer of AI.

   And skeptics insist any computer reasoning system will always fall
short of people's expectations because of the computer's tendency to
miss what is often obvious to the human expert.

   Still, Hart believes the technology will catch on because it is
cost-effective. Hart developed a Bayesian-based system that enabled
Ricoh's copier help desk to answer twice the number of customer
questions in almost half the time.

   Hart says Ricoh is now looking at embedding the networks in products
so customers can see for themselves what the likely problems are. He
believes auto makers will soon build Bayesian nets into cars that
predict when various components of a car need to be repaired or
replaced.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: UCLA professor Judea Pearl wrote early text on Bayesian
networks.  PHOTOGRAPHER: ANACLETO RAPPING / Los Angeles Times
GRAPHIC-DRAWING:
(...) Robert Burns / Los Angeles Times
                      Los Angeles Times, October 28, 1996

LANGUAGE: English



