
There are a number of ways of measuring properties of text, and from
there proceeding to make stylistic judgments; they can be found in style
guides, and include calculating readability indices, counting the number
of passive constructions, and so on.  One attribute of text that
is rarely mentioned explicitly in these style guides, but which underpins
many of the pieces of advice, is that of
 SEMANTIC DENSITY (see Dras and
Dale, 1995).  Consider the following pair of sentences, taken from
Halliday (1985):

  

It is apparent that the first of the pair is `denser' than the
second: both express the same (propositional) meaning, but the first does
so in a more compact way.  Halliday terms this  LEXICAL DENSITY,
`the density with which information is presented' (p68),
and measures it by looking at the proportion of  CONTENT WORDS.
Halliday adopts a fairly standard conception of content words as those
which belong to the open word classes:  nouns, verbs, adjectives and so on.
Non-content words are then those that belong to the closed classes,
such as prepositions, auxiliaries and so on.  The non-content,
closed class words are viewed by Halliday as lacking in informational content.

He does, however, note that there are some words on the borderline between
content and non-content words which are lexical items but in many
cases do little more than perform a grammatical function.  These include
the noun thing, as in That's a thing I could
do without (which could be rewritten as I could do without
that), and the verb make, as in Christophe
made a decision to come to the Drag Day (possibly rewritten as
Christophe decided to come to the Drag Day).

In this paper I look at a possible definitional extension of non-content
words, which incorporates the intuition expressed by Halliday that
words like make often contribute little, if any, propositional
meaning to the text.  This new definition is tested by an experiment
modelled on that of Grefenstette and Teufel (1995), which tries to
find the support verb that particular nominalisations will take--why
decision, for example, takes make, and not
have,
do, eat or perambulate.

The fact that a word contributes little if any content to a text is used
in a number of areas of linguistics and computational linguistics.
In information retrieval, non-content words are discarded, as they cannot
help to identify the topic of a text.  Mosteller and Wallace (1984),
on the other hand, retain them and discard the content words when attempting
to statistically determine the authorship of the disputed Federalist
papers, reasoning that while content words may vary across topic,
for a given author non-content words will not.  Halliday (1985),
as mentioned above, uses them to define the informational density of a
text, in order to compare spoken and written text.

What comprises the class of non-content words is neither uniform nor clearly
defined.  Halliday defines it to be the set of those words which are
part of a closed class system; information retrieval commonly uses a
combination of high-frequency and known function words; Mosteller
and Wallace use a list which was derived
from sources such as the King James Bible.

Halliday proposes that relative frequency of a word can be used to indicate
the amount of information it contributes.  If this is true, the choice of
closed class words to represent non-content words is plausible, since
a given grammatical item (the, and, it)
is more likely to have a higher frequency of occurrence than a given
lexical item (dog, run, verisimilitude).
It would also include make and thing, which are
high frequency lexical items.

However, this idea needs to be further refined.  A quick inspection of
a corpus will show that there are a number of words with definite
propositional content
which rank above non-content words in frequency.  In the 8
million word Grolier's Encyclopedia
the verb include (which definitely
conveys information, so it can't be a light constituent) occurs transitively
4284 times, as against make's 2697 times.

Make does, however, occur more frequently in constructions
which I will call  LIGHT CONSTRUCTIONS, such as make
a decision; they are mentioned under one name or another by linguists
and style guide authors, and what characterises them is that the light
constituent can be deleted (with some rewriting of the remaining text
to retain grammaticality).  For example, make a decision can
be rewritten as decide, the light element being make.
Jespersen (1954) is one of the earliest to
note these, commenting on the  LIGHT VERBS in expressions such
as take a walk.  Style guide writers like
Kane (1983) mention `deadwood' which can be eliminated
from phrases such as It is important for teachers to have
a knowledge of their students (a possible rewriting being It
is important
for teachers to know their students).  There are quite a few of
these constructions, such as light verbs with noun phrase complements,
light verbs with adjectival complements, and light nouns with post-modifiers
(Dras and Dale, 1995), but this paper only looks at one construction,
the light verbs with NP complements.  By definition, these constructions
will characteristically contain light verbs; this paper therefore
proposes that a modified definition be used for indicating whether
a word can be considered a non-content one: that the word has a high
relative frequency in these light constructions.  In particular, it examines
the relationship of the relative frequency of a verb in these
light verb constructions to its lightness.

It has been suggested that semantic factors are what determine the
relationship between a syntactic construction and its associated light
verb.  Wierzbicka (1982) proposes a set of semantic rules for determining
the light verb that corresponds to a particular noun object--an
explanation of why
one can have a drink but not *have an eat.  However,
defining these rules by hand for all nouns would be too
time-consuming to be practical.  Grefenstette and Teufel (1995)
take a statistical approach to finding what is termed the  SUPPORT
VERB for a particular noun.  They look at several nouns, including
appeal,  proposal, and demand.  In
a corpus of newspaper articles, they look for occurrences of the noun
and corresponding verb to find the most likely candidate for the support
verb.  They find that the most likely support verb for
appeal is make, which accords with intuition, but for
proposal, their system also finds reject
as an equally likely candidate; and for demand, the most
likely candidate is meet.  In this paper, I conduct a similar
experiment, finding support verbs for given nouns, to test
the definition proposed above: that a word's status regarding content-freeness
is related to its frequency of occurrence in light constructions.

The aim of the experiment is to show that there is a relationship between
relative frequency of verbs in particular constructions and the
content-freeness of these verbs.  A consequence of this is to be able
to choose
the light verb that corresponds to a nominalisation in a
light verb-NP complement
construction--the nominalisation's support verb (SV).
Deverbal nominalisations are chosen as they are the kinds of
grammatical entities which enter into the
SV-NP complement construction.

A way of extracting light verbs from a corpus is to simply take all
verb-object pairs where the object is a deverbal nominalisation.
Grefenstette and Teufel use only  LOCAL INFORMATION, information
that is specific to a particular nominal.
Counting all occurrences of each noun in verb-object pairs yields a
local relative frequency for each verb with respect to that noun.
So, to determine the support
verb for proposal they look only at verbs which co-occur
with the noun proposal.
While it seems intuitively obvious
to native English speakers that make is a more likely
candidate for support verb than reject,
the local frequency evidence does not indicate this.
Speakers also use the fact that make is the support
verb for other nominalisations such as judgment and
decision.  I have termed this knowledge  GLOBAL INFORMATION.
Counting all occurrences of each verb, regardless of their objects, yields
a global relative frequency for that verb.
In this experiment the local information is combined with the
global information to produce a modified likelihood of being a support
verb.

To gather local and global information, the 1992 version of Grolier's
encyclopedia, tagged by the part-of-speech tagger developed by Brill (1993),
was used.  A heuristic for producing the local information involved
searching the corpus for the nominal, determining the verb (if any) for which
the nominal was the direct object, and measuring the relative frequency
of these verbs.

The theoretical global information is a measure of how productive a given
support verb is: that is, how many different instances of the SV-NP
construction
it enters into.  The more productive verbs (like make)
rank higher on the list than less productive verbs (like bear);
this is combined with the local information so that the more
productive verbs, for a particular nominal, are subsequently ranked more
highly than
by the local information alone.  This weighting technique is similar
to that used by Yarowsky (1992) in the context of sense disambiguation.
In his work he uses counts of words in a window around a key word
to determine the salience of this key word to a particular sense.  These
word counts are weighted so that more common words contribute less;
that is, the less common words are accorded more importance.
We, on
the other hand, want to give more importance to the more common words,
given our assumption that it is high relative frequency in particular
constructions that helps define semantic lightness.

Grefenstette and Teufel note that a confounding factor in the local
information, when picking out nominals and their associated verbs, is that
the nominal may have become  CONCRETISED.
Generally, nominals represent an abstract concept, being essentially events
represented in noun form; but it is possible for the nominal to represent
a physical embodiment of that concept.
For example:

  

The abstract and concretised versions will tend to have different associated
verbs.  However, if the relative frequency hypothesis is true,
and the global information is an accurate reflection of the innate lightness
of a verb, this will elevate the light verb over the `heavier' ones,
which will be more likely to be associated with the concretised forms.

In practice, the global information is calculated from the aggregate of
the local data.  This means that there is a lot of noise--all
of the incorrect candidates for support verb are included in the global
information--but again, if the relative frequency hypothesis is
true, the relative frequency of the support verb in the local information
will be high (although not necessarily the highest), while this is
not true for non-support verbs.  So aggregating all of these should reinforce
the support verbs and not the others.

To construct the global information, a comprehensive list of
deverbal nominalisations
is needed, together with the associated support verbs, determined
from the local information.  To generate this list in a partially
automated manner, Longman's
Dictionary of Contemporary English (LDOCE) was used, including both built-in
information and a heuristic: a nominal is an event represented in noun form,
so the procedure used here for deriving a list of them involved looking
for nouns with associated  STEM VERBS.

Some verbs have this information encoded in their entries: for example,
adjust lists adjustment as its nominalisation;
there were 257 verbs in this category.  For others,
an automatic orthographic heuristic that matched nouns with verbs was
manually filtered to produce 1414 more deverbal nominalisations.
A system to identify support verbs for nominalisations was implemented
by tabulating all the verbs for which these nominals
were the direct object.

The list of nominals did not
cover some of
the nominals from the test set (listed in the table below).
The local information was generated for
each of the excluded test set nominals and aggregated into the global
information.
Candidates for support verb were ranked in order of the product
of local and global relative frequency of each candidate verb.

The light verb constructions and their constituent nominals used for testing
were taken from a range of sources, so that they would not be biased
to one particular genre.

The test set and results are summarised
 in Table ; the table contains: 


the source text;

the corresponding verb, which the source can be rewritten as;

the reference for the source text;

the system's first choice candidate for support verb for the source
text's constituent nominalisation;

the system's second choice; and

the ratio of the adjusted frequency, which is defined as the product
of local
and global relative frequencies, for the first and second choices.



Of the 18 examples, 13 of the choices for support verb match the corresponding
one from the source text.  Of the five incorrect ones, three
were incorrect because of lack of data: there are no occurrences of
snooze
or shove as direct objects of verbs in Grolier's, most
probably because they belong to a more informal register than that
used in encyclopedias.  Similarly, have a drink is an informal
phrase that would not normally be found in an encyclopedia.

Another of the incorrect cases, harm, had cause
as the proposed alternative.  This is an equally valid support verb,
and in any case, do was the second choice by only a small
margin.  This is true for a number of cases: where there is an alternative
support verb to the one used in the source text, the second alternative
represents another plausible choice, and the frequency ratio margin
is small (for example, for change and resemblance).

So if only the cases where enough data exists are considered, and if
alternative support verbs are allowed, the success rate becomes 14 of 15.

It is apparent that what constitutes a valid light verb construction depends
on the genre and register of the text.  More accurate results could
no doubt be obtained by using a corpus that was more representative
of general English.  Also, where shortcuts were taken (for example,
by not removing concretised nominalisations), more precision could be
obtained.  Notwithstanding these considerations, using the relative
frequency of a verb in light constructions seems to be a fairly good
indicator of a verb's content-freeness, providing plausible choices for
support
verbs for nominalisations.

Further work will involve extending this definition to other light
constructions--light verbs with adjectival complements, and light nouns
with post-modifiers--and fitting closed-class words, which traditionally
comprise the class of non-content words, into the framework.  This framework
can then be used to give a more accurate indication of lexical density; to
more accurately choose words to leave out, or include in, in the fields of
information retrieval and authorship attribution; and to fine-tune
stylistic judgments.

This work has benefited from the kind assistance of Robert Dale and
Mark Lauer.  I'd also like to thank Mike Johnson for many fruitful
discussions.  Financial support is gratefully acknowledged from
the Australian Government and the Microsoft Institute.

1
 Brill, Eric.
1993.
A Corpus-based Approach to Language Learning.
PhD Thesis, University of Pennsylvania, PA.

2
  Dras, Mark and Robert Dale. 1995. Style and Semantic Density.
Microsoft Institute Research Report no. 95-04.

3
  Grefenstette, Greg and Simone Teufel. 1995. "Corpus-based Method for Automatic Identification of Support Verbs
for Nominalizations".
To appear in Proc. of EACL'95.

4
 Halliday, Michael A. K.
1985.
Spoken and Written Language.
Oxford University Press, Oxford.

5
  Harris, Zellig.  1957. "Co-occurrence and transformation in linguistic structure".
Language, 33, 293-340.

6
  Huddleston, Rodney.  1968. Sentence and Clause in Scientific English.
Communication Research Centre, University College, London.

7
 Jespersen, Otto.
1942.
A Modern English Grammar on Historical Principles, Vol VI.
Allen and Unwin, London.

8
  Kane, Thomas S. 1983. The Oxford Guide to Writing.
Oxford University Press.  New York, NY.

9
 Mosteller, Frederick and David Wallace.
1984.
Applied Bayesian and Classical Inference: the Case of the
Federalist Papers.
Springer-Verlag.  New York, NY.

10
  Wierzbicka, Anna.  1982. "Why Can You Have a Drink When You Can't
*Have an Eat?".
Language, 58(4), 753-799.

11
 Yarowsky, D.
1992.
"Word sense disambiguation using statistical models of Roget's
categories trained on large corpora".
Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on
Computational
Linguistics, 454-460.

  Reprinted with kind permission from:
"Automatic Identification of Support Verbs: A Step Towards a Definition
of Semantic Weight" in Proceedings of the Eighth Australian Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (World Scientific, Singapore, 1995)
pp 451 - 458.  Copyright by World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte, 1995.
