
In this paper, we argue that Higher-Order Unification (HOU) provides
a linguistically adequate tool for modeling the semantics of focus.
 Building up on , we develop a unification-based analysis of focus which we show favourably compares
with two prominent theories of focus, Rooth's Alternative Semantics
and Krifka's Structured Meanings theory.  For data which is generally
viewed as a test-bed for focus theory (utterances with multiple focus
operators and second occurrence expressions), we show that contrary to
Rooth's and Krifka's theories, the HOU treatment yields a transparent
analysis while avoiding under- and over-generation.

Focus is a much debated notion. In this paper, we assume a simplified
version of Jackendoff's definition: a focus is the semantic
value of a prosodically prominent element. We take the
identification of prosodically prominent elements as given.

To set the stage for this paper, we will briefly review the folklore,
i.e. the main issues of focus theory. It is commonly agreed that focus
triggers the formation of an additional semantic value which we will
call the Focus Semantic Value (FSV).  The name and definition of
the FSV varies from author to author:
 Jackendoff  calls it the   presuppositional set, Rooth  the   Alternative Set and Krifka  the   Ground. In this paper, we assume a definition of the FSV which is in essence Rooth's Alternative set, that is, the set of semantic
objects obtained by making an appropriate substitution in the focus
position. For instance, the FSV of (1a) is defined as (1b), the
set of properties of the form like-ing y where y is an
individual (in what follows, focus is indicated using upper-case; we
also follow Montague's convention that for any type ,
is the set of objects of type 
and 
is the set of
wffs of type ).

It is also usually agreed that certain linguistic elements   associate with focus in that the meaning of the utterance
containing these elements varies depending on the choice of focus. For
instance in (2a-b), the focus operator only associates with
focus so that the difference in focus between (2a) and (2b) induces a
difference in meaning between the two utterances: in a world where Jon
introduced Paul to Mary and Sarah, and no other introduction takes
place, (2a) is necessarily false whilst (2b) is true.

To model this ``association-with-focus" phenomenon, the semantics of
associating-elements (e.g. focus operators, quantificational adverbs)
is made contingent on the FSV which itself, varies with the choice of
focus. The following example illustrates this. Suppose that the
meaning of only is determined by the following rule: 

where NP', VP' represent the meaning of NP and VP respectively, and
FSV stands for the focus semantic value of the VP. As we have seen
above, the FSV of (1a) is (1b), hence by the above semantic for   only, the semantics of (1a) is:

Intuitively, the only property
of the form like-ing y that holds of Jon is the property
of like-ing Mary. 

For computing the Focus Semantic Value, we propose to use
Higher-Order Unification. More specifically, given (part of) an
utterance U with semantic representation Sem and foci 

,
we require that the following equation, the ground
  equation, be solved:



Assuming the typed -calculus as our semantic representation
language, this equation can be solved by Huet's algorithm (cf.
 ), thus assigning a value to Gd. On the basis of this value, we can then define the FSV, written ,
as follows:



As mentioned before, this yields a focus semantic value which is in
 essence Rooth's Alternative Set. 

 Finally, we assume as in , that foci are stored and discharged non-deterministically as the need arises, thus contributing to the definition of the ground equation. Furthermore, equations are set up at the level at which there are needed e.g. at the VP level in the case of a pre-verbal focus operator.  

To illustrate the workings of our approach, we now run through a
simple example. Consider (1a). To determine the meaning of only
  likes MARY, the FSV of the VP must be known. Hence the
following equation must be solved:



 By HOU, the value of Gd is then: 



And by definition (3.1), the FSV is:



Assuming the semantic of only given above, the semantic
representation of (1a) is then:



In short, we obtain a reading similar to that of Rooth, the difference
being in the way the FSV is determined: by HOU in our approach, by
means of a semantic definition in Rooth's.

In this section, we show that the HOU approach favourably compares
with Rooth's and Krifka's analysis in that it correctly generates
interpretations which these two theories fail to yield. As we
shall see, the main reason for this is that the HOU approach makes
minimal assumptions about the role syntax plays in determining the
FSV. In particular, it relies neither on the use of Quantifier
Raising, nor on the assumption of a rule-to-rule definition of
the FSV. In this way, it avoids some of the pitfalls these
theories encounter.

We begin by a brief summary of Rooth's and Krifka's theories and
stress the properties relevant for the present discussion.
We then confront the three theories with the data.

In Rooth's approach, the FSV is defined by recursion on the
truth-conditional structure which is itself derived from LF
(i.e. Logical Form, the Government and Binding level of semantic
representation). Focus is then seen as introducing a free variable
whose value is determined by the current context and is furthermore
constrained to be an element or a subset of the FSV. For our purpose,
the following characteristics are particularly important:

Given Rooth's definition of the Alternative Set, a focus
  operator associates with any focus occurring in its
  scope.
Any NP may be subject to Quantifier Raising. Importantly, this includes focused NPs.
Quantifier Raising may not apply to quantifiers occurring in a scope-island.

Note that Rooth's approach critically relies on quantifier raising as
a means of moving a focused NP out of the scope of a focus operator.
However this only applies if the focus NP is not embedded in a scope
island.

Krifka's approach defines a rule-to-rule semantics which assigns to
any syntactic constituent, a meaning which can be either a
-term or a structured meaning, i.e. a tuple of the
form 


where Gd is Krifka's
Focus Semantic Value and F is a (possibly complex) focus. 

For our purpose, an important characteristic of Krifka's approach is
the tight syntax/semantic interaction it presupposes. In particular,
the theory requires that a focus operator combines with a syntactic
constituent C whose structured semantics 


provides the focus (F) this operator associates with. In
other words, the right-adjacent sibling of a focus operator must
contain all and only the foci this operator associates with.  As we
shall later see, some of the data does not seem to square with this
assumption.

 Utterances with multiple focus operators are known pathological cases of focus theory:

In the given context, the preferred reading of (3b) can be glossed as
follows: it is also the case for SUE2, that Jon only1 read the
  letters she sent to PAUL1 - i.e. Jon didn't read the letters she2  sent to e.g.  Peter. In other words, the preferred reading is that
also2 associates with SUE2 and only1 with   PAUL1.

Under the HOU approach, (3b) is analysed as follows. First, the
meaning of only1 read the letters that SUE2 sent to
  PAUL1 is derived. To determine the FSV of the VP, the ground
equation (4b) must be solved for which (4c) is a solution. Applying
 the semantics of only given in section , the semantics  of (4a) is then as given in (4d). 



Analysis then proceeds further and the ground equation 



must be solved to determine the meaning of also2 only1 read the letters that
  SUE2 sent to PAUL1. A possible solution for G[2] is 



Assuming the  following semantics for 





we obtain the desired reading



 As mentioned in section , under the Alternative Semantics approach, a focus operator necessarily associates with any focus
occurring in its scope. Furthermore in (3b), the scope of   only1 is the whole VP read the letters that SUE2 sent to
  PAUL1.  Hence, if no quantifier raising occurs, only1
associates with both SUE2 and PAUL1. Thus in order
to generate the desired reading, SUE2 must be moved out of
the scope of only1. However, since the NP the letters
  that SUE2 sent to PAUL1 is a scope island, quantifier raising
is impossible. Hence, the desired reading cannot be
 generated. 

Recall that in the Structured Meanings approach, the right-sibling of
a focus operator must contain all and only the focus this operator
 associates with (cf. section ). Hence, to generate the desired reading in (3b), there must exist a syntactic constituent
which is right-adjacent to only1 and which contains PAUL1
 but not SUE2; similarly, there must exist a syntactic constituent which is right-adjacent to also and which contains SUE2 but not
PAUL1.  Given standard assumptions about syntax, such
constituents do not exist so that the desired interpretation cannot be
generated.

We call second occurrence expressions (SOE) utterances which partially
or completely repeat a previous utterance. Typical cases of SOEs are:
corrections (5a), echo-sentences (5b) and variants (5c).

An important property of SOEs is that the repeated material is   deaccented, that is, it is characterised by an important reduction
 in pitch, amplitude and duration (cf. ).  On the other hand, all three theories of focus considered here are based on the
assumption that focus is prosodically marked and thus, identifiable.
Hence, the question arises of whether these theories can account for
SOEs.

Our proposal is to analyse SOEs as involving a deaccented anaphor
which consists of the repeated material, and is subject to the
condition that its semantic representation must unify with the
semantic representation of its antecedent.

This is modeled as follows. Let SSem and TSem be the semantic
representation of the source (i.e. antecedent) and target (i.e.
anaphoric) clause respectively, and 

,


 be the target and source parallel elements, then the interpretation of an SOE must respect the following equations:



Intuitively, these two equations require that target and source clause
share a common semantics An, the semantics of the deaccented
anaphor.

Given this proposal, the analysis of (5a) involves three equations:



Since neither Gd nor Focus are initially given, the third equation
 above is untyped and cannot be solved by Huet's algorithm. In that situation, we can either assume some delaying mechanism or some extension of
Huet's algorithm that can cope with type variables (cf.
 ,).  Resolution of the first equation yields the following solution:



By applying An to p, the left-hand side of the second equation is
then determined so that the second equation becomes  



and the value of Gd is identified as being



(Note further, that the third equation can now be solved thus yielding
the value m for the focus F.)  That is, the HOU approach to
SOEs allows us to correctly capture that fact that an SOE can inherit
its FSV from its source clause (by unification). In
 , we show in more detail how the analysis accounts for the interaction of focus with anaphora and definiteness in the
case of a particular instantiation of SOEs, namely corrections.

Under the Alternative Semantics approach, SOEs are captured as
follows. It is assumed that the quantification domain of focus
operators is a variable whose value is contextually determined. In the
standard case (i.e. the case where the focus is prosodically marked),
this quantification domain of focus operators is usually identified
with the FSV of the VP.  However, in the SOE cases, the assumption is
that the quantification domain of focus operators is identified with
the FSV of the source clause. Thus in (5a), the quantification of
only in the second clause is identified with the FSV of the
preceding utterance i.e. the set of properties of the form   like-ing somebody.

But now, consider the following example:

Clearly, this dialog is ill-formed in that (6b) is no appropriate
correction for (6a). However, under the Alternative Semantics
approach, it will not be ruled out since the FSV of (6a) provides an
appropriate quantification domain for the focus operator in (6b): as
required by the semantic of pre-verbal only, it is a set of
properties whose elements can be identified with the VP semantic value

.
Hence although Rooth's approach captures some
cases of SOEs, it does not seem to provide an adequate
characterisation of the phenomena at hand.

The Structured Meanings proposal distinguishes between proper-
and quasi-SOEs. Proper-SOEs involve an exact repetition of
some previous linguistic material, and are analysed as involving an
anaphor which is constrained by the restriction that it be a segmental
copy of its antecedent.  For instance, the semantics of only
  likes Mary in (5b) is not determined by the semantics of its parts
but is instead identified with the semantic value of its antecedent
only likes MARY in (5a). In contrast, quasi-SOEs only involve
semantic equivalence between repeating and repeated material
(for instance, in a quasi-SOE a repeated element may be
pronominalised). Krifka claims that quasi-SOEs have prosodically
marked foci and thus do not raise any specific difficulty.

However this theory faces a number of methodological and empirical
difficulties. First, it is non-compositional because the meaning of
the deaccented material in proper-SOEs is solely defined by the
meaning of its antecedent (rather than the meaning of its parts).
Second, the prosodic data is rather unclear: the assumption that
quasi-SOE contains a prosodically marked focus is a moot point (cf.
 ) and if it proves to be false, the analysis fails to account for quasi-SOEs. Third, it is counterintuitive in that it
handles separately two classes of data (i.e.  quasi- and
proper-SOEs) which naturally belong together. Indeed, the HOU
approach can be shown to provide a uniform treatment of quasi- and
 proper-SOEs (cf. ). 

The unification problem can be stated as follows: Given two terms of a
logic M and N, is there a substitution, ,
of terms
for variables that will make the two terms identical (i.e.
(M) = (N))?

It is well-known that for Higher-Order Logic (e.g. the typed
-calculus) the space of solutions can be infinite and
furthermore, the HOU problem is only semi-decidable so that the
unification algorithm need not terminate for unsolvable problems.

Fortunately, in our case we are not interested in general unification,
but we can use the fact that our formulae belong to very restricted
syntactic subclasses, for which much better results are known. In
particular, the fact that free variables only occur on the left hand
side of our equations reduces the problem of finding solutions to
higher-order matching, of which decidability has been proven for the
 subclass of third-order formulae  and is conjectured for the general case. This class, (intuitively allowing
only nesting functions as arguments up to depth two) covers all of our
examples in this paper.  For a discussion of other subclasses of
formulae, where higher-order unification is computationally feasible
 see . 

In this paper, we have argued that Higher-Order Unification provides
an adequate tool for computing Focus Semantic Values. To this end, we
have considered data which is viewed as a test-bed for focus theory
and shown that, whilst existing theories either under-generate,
over-generate or are methodologically unsatisfactory, the HOU
approach yields a simple and transparent analysis. There appear to be
two main reasons for this.

First, the HOU analysis makes minimal assumptions about the role
syntax is called to play in determining the FSV. It is defined on a
purely semantic level in the sense that unification operates on
semantic representations, and relies neither on quantifier raising,
nor on a rule-to-rule definition of the FSV. As we have seen, this
type of approach is a plausible way to avoid under-generation.

Second, the HOU approach permits an equational analysis which can
naturally be further constrained by additional equations. The interest
of such an approach was illustrated in our treatment of SOEs which we
characterise as involving two phenomena: the computation of an FSV,
and the resolution of a deaccented anaphor. Not only did we show that
this analysis is methodologically and empirically sound, we also
showed that it finds a natural realisation in the equational framework
of HOU: each linguistic phenomena is characterised by some equation(s)
and the equations may mutually constrain each other. For instance, in
the case of SOEs, we saw that the equations characterising the
deaccented anaphor help determine the unidentified FSV of the
utterance containing the unmarked focus.

Clearly, our approach extends to cases of adverbial quantification.
For lack of space we could not develop the theory here; let us just
 point out that von Fintel's criticism  of semantic approaches to focus, also applies to Krifka's Structured
Meanings analysis, but not to the HOU approach presented here. Von
Fintel points out that in certain cases of adverbial quantification, a
focus operator associates with an unmarked focus and does   not associate with a marked focus occurring in its scope - as
should be clear from this article, this is unproblematic for our
analysis.

Of course, there are still many open issues. First, how does the
proposed analysis interact with quantification? Second, how does it
extend to a dynamic semantics (e.g. Discourse Representation Theory)?

The work reported in this paper was funded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in Sonderforschungsbereich SFB-378,
Project C2 (LISA).

Christine Bartels.
1995.
Second occurrence test.
Ms.

Mary Dalrymple, Stuart Shieber, and Fernando Pereira.
1991.
Ellipsis and higher-order-unification.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 14:399-452.

Daniel Dougherty.
1993.
Higher-order unification using combinators.
Theoretical Computer Science B, 114(2):273-298.

Gilles Dowek.
1992.
Third order matching is decidable.
In Proc. LICS-7, pages 2-10, IEEE.

Claire Gardent and Michael Kohlhase.
1996.
Higher-order coloured unification and natural language semantics.
In Proc. ACL96, Santa Cruz, USA.
forthcoming.

Claire Gardent, Michael Kohlhase and Noor van Leusen.
1996.
Corrections and higher-order unification.
CLAUS report 77, University of Saarland.

Grard Huet.
1995.
A unification algorithm for typed -calculus.
Theoretical Computer Science 1, pages 27-57.

Ulrich Hustadt.
1991.
A complete transformation system for polymorphic higher-order
  unification.
Technical Report MPI-I-91-228, MPI Informatik, Saarbrcken, Germany.

Dieter Hutter and Michael Kohlhase.
1995.
A coloured version of the -calculus.
SEKI-Report SR-95-05, Universitt des Saarlandes.

Ray S. Jackendoff.
1972.
Semantic Interpretation in Generative Grammar.
The MIT Press.

Angelika Kratzer.
1991.
The representation of focus.
In Arnim van Stechow and Dieter Wunderlich, editors, Semantik:
  Ein internationales Handbuch der zeitgenoessischen Forschung. Berlin: Walter
  de Gruyter.

Manfred Krifka.
1992.
A compositional semantics for multiple focus constructions.
In Joachim Jacobs, editor, Informationsstruktur and Grammatik.
Sonderheft 4.

Christian Prehofer.
1994.
Decidable higher-order unification problems.
In Alan Bundy, editor, Proc. CADE94, LNAI, pages 635-649, Nancy, France.

Steve G. Pulman.
1995.
Higher-order unification and the interpretation of focus.
Paper submitted for publication.

Mats Rooth.
1992.
A theory of focus interpretation.
Natural Language Semantics, pages 75-116.

Kai von Fintel.
1995.
A minimal theory of adverbial quantification.
Unpublished draft Ms. MIT, Cambridge, March.

  Though in fact, our
  definition is more syntactic than Rooth. In Rooth's approach, the
  FSV definition is purely semantic whereas in our approach the FSV is
  indirectly defined by solving equations and the value thus obtained
  (i.e. the value of Gd) is a term, that is, a syntactic
  object. Hence, our FSV can be more accurately compared to Kratzer's
  presupposition skeleton,.  This means that our approach
  inherits the advantages of Kratzer's approach (cf.
   ). In particular, it adequately captures the   interaction of focus with VP ellipsis as illustrated by Kratzer's
  notorious example: I only went to TANGLEWOOD because you
    did.
    Unification   yields another possible value of Gd, namely 

.
In what follows, we assume a restriction similar to the
   DSP's Primary Occurrence Restriction 's:   the occurrence directly associated with the focus is a primary
  occurrence and any solution containing a primary occurrence is
  discarded as linguistically invalid. For instance, m is a primary
  occurrence in the equation 


so that the
  solution 


is invalid. For a
  formal treatment of DSP's Primary Occurrence Restriction and a
  discussion of how it can be extended to focus, see
   . 
  The subscripts
  indicates which operators associate with which focus. There are
  there for clarity only, and have no theoretical import.
  For clarity, we have
  simplified the semantic representation of (3b); nothing hinges on
  this.
  This point is independently noted in
   . 
  This is a simplification: the constituent
  may in fact contain SUE2 but this focused NP should already
  have been bound by some focus operator so that the focus of the
  whole constituent only includes PAUL1. Since no focus operators
  occur in this constituent, it follows that such constituent does not
  exist.
  As in
   , we take the identification of parallel   elements as given - for the moment.
  Even
   though this is not explicitly stated, Pulman's analysis  faces a similar problem.
