
The division of morphology and syntax in agglutinative languages is
difficult compared to relatively more isolating languages. For
instance, in Turkish, there is a significant amount of interaction between
morphology and syntax. Typical examples are: causative suffixes change the
valence of the verb, and the reciprocal suffix subcategorize the verb
for a noun phrase marked with the comitative case. Moreover, the head
that a bound morpheme modifies may be not its stem but a compound
head crossing over the word boundaries, e.g.,

3iyi  oku-mus  ocuk
           well  read-REL  child
           'well-educated child'

 In (), the relative suffix -mus  (in past form of subject participle)
modifies [iyi oku] to give the scope
[[[iyi oku]mus] ocuk].
If syntactic composition is performed after morphological composition,
we would get compositions
such as [iyi [okumus ocuk]] or
[[iyi okumus] ocuk], which yield ill-formed
semantics for this utterance.

 As pointed out by Oehrle ,, there is no reason to assume a layered grammatical architecture which has linguistic division of
labor into components acting on one domain at a time. As a
computational counterpart of this idea, rather than
treating morphology, syntax and semantics in a cascaded manner,
we integrate the process models of morphology and syntax, providing
semantic composition in parallel.
The model,
which is based on
 Combinatory Categorial Grammars (CCG) ,, uses the morpheme as the building
block of composition at all three linguistic domains.

When the morpheme is given the same status as the lexeme in terms
of its lexical, syntactic, and semantic contribution, the distinction
between the process models of morphotactics and syntax disappears.
In this case, new scoping problems arise in word and phrase formation.

CG accounts of scoping problems concentrate on syntactic and semantic
 issues such as quantifier scoping ,. In word formation, morphological bracketing paradoxes are introduced by
lexicalized composite affixes which require mixed
 compositions . However, the scoping problems in morphosyntax go beyond bracketing paradoxes as they may also
produce different semantic forms.
 Consider the example in (): 

3uzun  kol-lu  gmlek
           long  sleeve-ADJ  shirt

 Two different compositions in CCG formalism are
 given in Figure . Both interpretations are plausible, with (1a) being the most likely in the
absence of  a long pause after the first adjective. To account for
both cases, the suffix -lu must be allowed to modify the head
 it is attached to (e.g., 1b in Figure ), or a compound head encompassing the word boundaries (e.g., 1a
 in Figure ). 

 Example ( depicts the CCG treatment of this example. The verb konus does not
 subcategorize for a dative noun phrase (cf. example ); kadina is the argument of dn.
In this case, the adverbial suffix -erek must modify
[kadina dn]
to obtain the correct reading.
[a.]3kadin-a  dn-erek  konus-tu
                    woman-DATIVE  turn-ADV  talk-TENSE
                    'Facing the lady, (he/she) talked.'
[b.]* kadina konustu

 Oehrle  describes a model of multi-dimensional composition in which every domain Di has an algebra with a finite set
of primitive operations Fi. As indicated by Turkish data in
 sections , Fi may in fact have a domain larger than--but compatible with--Di.

In order to perform morphological and syntactic compositions in a
unified (monostratal) framework, the slash operators of categorial grammar
must be enriched
with the knowledge about the type of process and the type of morpheme.
 We adopt a representation similar to Hoeksema and Janda's  notation for
the operator. The 3-tuple (direction, morpheme type, process type)
 indicates direction (left, right, unspecified), morpheme type (free, bound), and the type of morphological or syntactic
attachment (e.g., affixation, syntactic concatenation,
 reduplication, clitic). Examples
of different operator combinations are as follows:

Entries in the categorial lexicon have tactical constraints, grammatical
and semantic features, and phonological representation. Similar
 to  HPSG , every entry is a signed attribute-value matrix.

Syntactic and semantic information are of grammatical (g) sign and
semantic (s) sign, respectively. These properties include
agreement features such as person, number, and possessive, and
selectional restrictions:




Basic and derived categories of CG are of p (property) or f(function) sign, respectively.




 RES-OP-ARG is the categorial notation for the element. Every
 RES and  ARG feature has an f or p sign.

Lexical and phrasal elements have functional representation (f or p sign)
and the  PHON feature.
 PHON represents the phonological string. Lexical elements
may have (a) phonemes, (b) meta-phonemes
such as  H for high vowel, and  D for a dental stop whose
voicing is not yet determined, and (c) optional segments,
e.g., -(y)lA, to model vowel/consonant drops,  in the  PHON
feature. During composition,
the surface forms of composed elements are mapped and saved in  PHON.
 PHON also allows efficient lexicon search. For instance, the causative
suffix -DHr has eight different realizations but only one
lexical entry.

A special feature value called none is used for imposing certain
morphotactic constraints. For instance, most of the inflectional
morphemes of Turkish have the category  X
X where
 X is the category of the stem. none is used to make sure
that the stem is not inflected with the same feature more than once; it
also ensures, through  SYN constraints, that inflections are
marked in the right order.
A sample lexicon entry for a derivational suffix is given in
 Figure . For composition, we use a generalized LR  parser  in which CCG rules are encoded as recursive rewrite rules with
equational constraints.

Turkish is a language in which grammatical functions can be marked
morphologically (e.g., case), or syntactically (e.g., indirect
objects). Semantic composition is also affected by the interplay
of morphology and syntax, for instance the change in the scope
of modifiers and genitive suffixes, or valency and thematic
role change in causatives. To model interactions between domains,
we propose a categorial approach in which composition in all domains
proceed in parallel.
In the domain of phonology, there are categorial accounts of
 prosody  and voice assimilation . Our treatment of phonology is not yet integrated into the uniform
grammar architecture. Morphophonemic processes such as vowel
harmony and devoicing are modeled as mappings from the operator
and the phonological strings to surface forms. Integrating categorial
phonology into the architecture will help restore the modularity of
processing at all domains.

A. E. Ades and M. Steedman.
1982.
On the order of words.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 4:517-558.

Jack Hoeksema and Richard D. Janda.
1988.
Implications of process-morphology for categorial grammar.
In R. T. Oehrle, E. Bach, and D. Wheeler, editors,
Categorial Grammars and Natural Language Structures, D. Reidel,
Dordrecht, 1988.

Beryl Hoffman.
1992.
A CCG approach to free word order languages.
In Proceedings of the 30th Annual Meeting of the
ACL, Student Session, 1992.

Michael Moortgart.
1988.
Mixed Composition and Discontinuous Dependencies.
In R. T. Oehrle, E. Bach, and D. Wheeler, editors,
Categorial Grammars and Natural Language Structures, D. Reidel,
Dordrecht, 1988.

Richard T. Oehrle.
1988.
Multi-dimensional compositional functions as a basis for
grammatical analysis.
In R. T. Oehrle, E. Bach, and D. Wheeler, editors,
Categorial Grammars and Natural Language Structures, D. Reidel,
Dordrecht, 1988.

Richard T. Oehrle.
1994.
Term-labeled Categorial Type Systems.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 17:633-678.

Fernando C. N. Pereira.
1990.
Categorial Semantics and Scoping.
Computational Linguistics, 16(1):1-10.

C. Pollard and I. A. Sag.
1994.
Head-driven Phrase Structure Grammar.
University of Chicago Press.

Mark Steedman.
1985.
Dependencies and coordination in the grammar of Dutch and
English.
Language, 61:523-568.

Mark Steedman.
1991.
Structure and intonation.
Language, 67:260-296.

Masaru Tomita.
1987.
An Efficient Augmented-Context-Free Parsing Algorithm.
Computational Linguistics, 13(1-2):31-46.

Deirdre Wheeler.
1988.
Consequences of some categorially-motivated phonological
assumptions.
In R. T. Oehrle, E. Bach, and D. Wheeler, editors,
Categorial Grammars and Natural Language Structures, D. Reidel,
Dordrecht, 1988.

  derived and basic
categories in the examples
 are in fact feature structures; see section . We use 


to denote the combination of categories x and ygiving the result z
we have not yet incorporated into our model the word-order
 variation in syntax. See  for a CCG based approach to this phenomenon.
intensifiers such as ap- and bes- in
ap-aik and bes-belli may appear as prefixes but they
are in fact reduplicated from the first syllable of the stem
