
Recently, there has been a growing interest in research on formalizing
feature theory.
Some formalisms that appeared lately are the feature algebra of
 , the modal logic of ,  the deterministic finite automata of , and  the first-order predicate logic of . These formalisms describe the use of feature theory in
computational linguistics. They are a source of interesting
technical research, and various complexity results have been achieved.
However, we argue that such formalisms offer little help to
computational linguists in practice.
The grammatical theories used in computational linguistics do not
consist of bare feature theories.
The feature theories that are used in computational linguistics are
contained in unification grammars. These unification grammars
consist of constituent structure components, and feature theories.
We claim that the complexity results from the formalisms do no
longer hold when a feature theory
and a constituent structure component are combined into
a unification grammar.

In this paper, we will focus on the complexity results that are obtained
from formalizing feature theories.
We will prove that these complexity results do not hold if we consider
unification grammars that use these feature
theories in addition to a constituent structure component.
First we will show, that the complexity of
a unification grammar theory may be higher than the
complexity of its feature theory and constituent structure components.
Second we will explain, that the complexity of a unification grammar
may be lower than the complexity of the formalized feature theory.

Both proofs put the complexity results that have been achieved in a
different perspective. The first proof
implies that the complexity of a feature
theory does not provide an upper bound for the complexity
of grammars using that feature theory. The second proof
implies that the  complexity of a feature
theory might not provide a lower bound for the complexity
of grammars using that feature theory.
Therefore, we argue that if one is interested in the complexity of
unification grammars that are used in grammars, one should look at the
complexity of these unification grammars as a whole.
No insight in the complexity of a unification grammar is gained by
looking only at the complexity of its components in isolation.

The outline of this paper is as follows. The next section contains
the preliminaries on complexity theory and feature theory. In
 Section , we introduce a simple feature theory: a feature theory with only reentrance.
 In Section , we present a unification grammar that uses this simple feature theory.
We show that the recognition problem of this grammar is harder than
the unification problem of the feature theory and the recognition
problem of the constituent structure component.
 In Section , we explain why the recognition problem of a unification grammar might be of lower
complexity than the unification problem of the feature theory.
 In Section , we present our conclusions.

In complexity theory one tries to determine the complexity of
problems. The complexity is measured by the amount of time and
space needed to solve a problem. Usually, one considers decision
problems: problems that are answered  `Yes' or `No'.
Often we are interested in the distinction between tractable
and intractable problems. A problem is tractable if
its solution requires an amount of steps that is polynomial in the
size of the input: we say that the problem requires
polynomial time. Likewise, we speak of linear time, etcetera.
The tractable problems are also called `P problems'.
The intractable problems are called `NP-hard problems'. The easiest
intractable problems are the `NP-complete problems'. It is
unknown whether NP-complete problems have polynomial time solutions.
However we know, that solutions for NP-complete problems can
be guessed and checked in polynomial time. It is strongly
believed that the class of P problems and the class of
NP-complete problems are different, although this is yet
unproven.

There is a direct manner to determine the upper bound
complexity of a problem,
if there is an algorithm that solves the problem: determine the
complexity of that algorithm.
An indirect way to determine the lower bound
complexity of a problem is the reduction.
A reduction from some problem A to some problem B maps
instances of problem A onto instances of problem B.

The reductions that we will consider are known as polynomial time,
many-one reductions. These many-one reductions are subject to
two conditions:
(1) the reductions are easy to compute, and
(2) the reductions preserve the answers.
A reduction from A to B is easy to compute, if the mapping takes
polynomial time.
A reduction preserves answers if the answer to the instance of A is
the same as the answer to the instance of B. That is, the answer
to the instance of A is `Yes' if, and only if,
the answer to the instance of B is also `Yes'.

A reduction is an elegant way to classify a problem as intractable.
Suppose problem B is a problem with unknown complexity.
Let there be a reduction f from an NP-hard problem A to problem B.
Furthermore, let f conform to the two conditions above.
By an indirect proof, it follows from this reduction that
B is at least as hard as A.
Hence B is also an NP-hard problem. If we also prove that we can guess
a solution for B and check that guessed solution in polynomial time,
then B is an NP-complete problem.

A well-known NP-complete problem is  SATISFIABILITY (SAT).

Definition  2.1   
 SATISFIABILITY 
 INSTANCE:
 A formula 

 ,
from propositional logic, in conjunctive
 normalform.  
 QUESTION:
 Is there an assignment of truth-values to the propositional
 variables of 

 ,
such that 

is true?

The instances of  SATISFIABILITY are formulas in conjunctive
normalform, i.e., the formulas are conjunctions of
clauses. The clauses are disjunctions of literals, and the literals are
positive and negative occurrences of propositional variables.
We call formula 

a satisfiable formula
if an assignment exists that makes formula 

true.

An assignment assigns either the value true or
the value false to each propositional variable.
Given such an assignment, we can determine the truth-value of a
formula.
The formula 


 is true if, and only if, each clause, 

 ,
is true.
A clause 


 is true if, and only if, at least one literal, li, is true.
A positive (negative) literal, li = pj (


 ),
is true if, and only if, the variable pj is
assigned the value true (false).

Although there is no such thing as a universal feature theory, there
is a general understanding of its abstract objects.
These abstract objects describe the internal information or
properties of words and phrases.
Properties that these abstract objects typically have
are the case, the gender, the number, and the tense of
words and phrases.

The properties of abstract objects can be combined to form new
abstract objects. This operation is called unification.
The unification of abstract objects combines all the properties of
these abstract objects, provided that the properties are
not contradictory.

All kinds of additions to these rudiments of feature theory have been
presented in the literature. We will not discuss them here, but
 refer to Section , in which we introduce a feature theory that serves our purposes.

In this section we will present a simple
feature theory. The feature theory contains reentrance, but
no negation or disjunction.
Although this feature theory is simple, it contains
many aspects from other feature theories.
 In addition, Section  shows that combining this simple feature theory with a simple
constituent structure component results in a
difficult unification grammar.

In the first part of this section, we will
formalize the notion of a feature theory.
In the second part of this section, we will
present an algorithm that solves
the unification problem in an amount of time that is quadratic
in the size of its input.
This part should convince the reader that the feature theory
is indeed simple.

Although a universal feature theory does not exist,
there is a general understanding of its objects.
The object of feature theories are abstract linguistic objects,
e.g., an object `sentence', an object `masculine third person singular',
an object `verb', an object `noun phrase'. These
abstract objects have properties, like, tense, number, predicate,
subject. The values of these properties are either atomic, like,
present and singular, or abstract objects, like, verb and noun
phrase.

The abstract objects can be represented as rooted graphs
(`feature-graphs'). The nodes of these graphs stand for abstract
objects, and the edges represent the properties.
More formally, a feature-graph is either a pair 


 ,
where a is an
atomic value and 

is the empty set, or a pair (x, E),
where x is a root node, and E is a finite, possibly empty set of
edges such that (1) for each property and all nodes there is at
most one edge that represents the property departing from the node,
and (2) if there
is an edge in E from node y to node z, then there is a path
in E leading from node x to node y.

As an example consider the following abstract objects and
simplified feature-graph.

Example(s)

Sentence: A man walks 
        This abstract object has property  TENSE with value
        present, property  SUBJECT with value Noun phrase:
        A man, and property  PREDICATE with value Verb: walks.

Noun phrase: A man 
        has property  NUMBER with value singular.

Verb: walks 
        also has property  NUMBER with value singular.



The abstract objects are fully described by their properties and their
values.
Multiple descriptions for the properties and values of the abstract
linguistic objects are presented in the literature.
A formal description language for these
properties and values of the abstract linguistic objects is
a sublanguage of predicate logic with equality, FL,
 introduced by . 

Assume three pair-wise disjunct sets of symbols: the set of constants
A, the set of variables V, and the set of attributes L.
The attributes (denoted by f, g, h or capitalized strings)
correspond to the properties of
the abstract objects,
the variables (denoted by x, y, z) correspond to the abstract
objects, and
the constants (denoted by a, b, c or italicized strings)
correspond to the atomic values.
Let s, t denote variables or constants, and let
a path (denoted by p, q) be a finite, possible empty sequence of
attributes.

Definition  3.1   
The terms of the description language FL are the elements
from V and A.
The formulas of the description language (FL-formulas) are
equations, and conjunctions:

if 


are formulas, p, q are paths, and s, t are
terms.  The formulas of the following form are called
primitive formulas:

The description language FL is interpreted as a special
 algebra in . However for our purposes it suffices to interpret the formulas
as feature graphs. The formula


is interpreted as: the terms s and t denote the
same node in the feature-graph.
The formula 


is interpreted as:
there is an edge with label ffrom the node denoted by s to the node denoted by tin the feature-graph.

 As an example, consider the feature-graph given in Figure . The following formula describes the feature-graph,
provided that the proper sets A, V and L are given.

Another familiar, intuitive description is the attribute-value matrix
notation. An attribute-value matrix (AVM) is a set of attribute-value pairs.
The values of the attribute-value pairs are boxlabels, and atomic
values or AVMs, where equal boxlabels denote equal values. The
elements of an AVM are written below one another. The total
set is written between squared brackets.

 For instance, the feature-graph given in Figure  could be represented by the following attribute-value matrix.
The box-labels 

are used to denote that the two attributes
 NUMBER have the same value.

The AVM notation is intuitive because AVMs strongly resemble
feature-graphs. We can view the opening brackets and the
atomic values of an AVM as nodes. The outermost bracket is the
root-node. The attributes of the AVM can be view as edges with the
attribute as their label. The box-labels identify nodes in the
feature-graph.

In this paper we will use both the AVMs and the FL-formulas as a
description language. Because AVMs can be transformed in linear time
 into formulas , Section 6] the use of different notations should cause no confusion.

Let A and B be abstract linguistic objects, or feature-graphs,
that are described by the FL-formulas 

and 

 ,
respectively.  The unification of A and B is described by
FL-formula 


 if and only if 


describes a
feature-graph.
In the final part of this section
we will present an efficient algorithm that
determines whether an FL-formula describes a feature-graph.
Hence we can view the algorithm as a unification algorithm.

Let A and B be abstract linguistic objects, or feature-graphs,
that are described by the AVMs [F] and [G],
respectively.  The unification of A and B is denoted by


 .
The algorithm of the final part of this section can be used
to compute the AVM 


efficiently, in the following way.

First, there is a linear time algorithm that
transforms AVMs into FL formulas.
Second, the algorithm of the final part of this section can
easily be modified
such that it also outputs the feature-graph that is described by
an FL-formula. Since the modified algorithm will remain
efficient, the feature-graph will be small.
Finally, there is a trivial, linear time, algorithm that transforms
feature-graphs into AVMs.

In the remainder of this section we will show that the feature theory
is simple. We will provide an algorithm, called  FEATUREGRAPHSAT, that
determines whether a formula of the description language describes a
feature-graph.
The algorithm is a slight modification of the constraint-solving
 algorithm in , Section 5]. 

The algorithm  FEATUREGRAPHSAT can be used to
determine whether two abstract objects can be unified: if the formulas

and 

describe abstract objects, then 


describes their unification if, and only if, the unification
exists. So we may say that the algorithm solves the unification
problem.

The algorithm  FEATUREGRAPHSAT below
determines syntactically whether a formula is
satisfiable in some feature algebra. Because there is a 1-1
correspondence between
satisfiable formulas and feature-graphs, the algorithm determines
whether a formula describes a feature-graph.
The algorithm first transforms any formula by means of syntactic
simplification rules into a normal form. Then
this normal form is checked syntactically in order to see
whether the formula is satisfiable.

The correctness and the complexity of the algorithm  FEATUREGRAPHSAT
 follow from , Section 5]. The function  TRANSFORM, the procedure  SIMPLIFY, the clash-freeness test and
the acyclicity test can all be computed in an amount of time that is
quadratic in the size of the formula 

 .
Hence the algorithm  FEATUREGRAPHSAT takes quadratic time,
and thus shows that the feature theory is indeed simple.

 ALGORITHM FEATUREGRAPHSAT  INPUT: 		Formula 

from the                description language.  OUTPUT: 		1) `Yes' if 

describes an acyclic                feature-graph, or         2) `No' otherwise.Begin AlgorithmEach 

is of the form 

 ,
where p, q are paths,s,t are terms.  TRANSFORM 

into a set of primitive formulas:                   

 .
 SIMPLIFY the set P, yielding set S, until no further                simplification is possible. If set S is clash-free and acyclic, then		Exit with answer `Yes', else 		Exit with answer `No'. End Algorithm

 FUNCTION TRANSFORM         INPUT: 		Formula 

from the                description language.  OUTPUT: 		A set of primitive formulas 

 .
Begin Function 

 ,
where Step 0. 		

Step 1. 		

, where y is a        fresh variable Step 2. 		

, where         yi (

 )
are fresh variables, and y is a variable        introduced in step 1. End Function

In the procedure  SIMPLIFY we will use the following
notations. We use [x/s]P to denote the set that is obtained from
P by replacing every occurrence of variable x by term s, and


to denote the set 


 ,
provided that 


 .

  PROCEDURE SIMPLIFY (c.f., )        INPUT: 		Set of primitive formulas P. OUTPUT: 		Simplified set of primitive formulas S. Begin ProcedureDo while one of the following four simplification rules isapplicable    1. 		 

if x occurs in P and 

   2. 		

   3. 		

   4. 		

   End while    Exit with the simplified form of set P, S. End Procedure

Lemma  3.1   
A simplified set of primitive formulas S is clash-free if
1.
S contains no formula 


 ,
and
2.
S contains no formula 


such that 

 .

 ProofFrom , Proposition 5.4]. 

Lemma  3.2   
A simplified set of primitive formulas S is acyclic if, and only
if, S does not contain a sequence of formulas 


and 


(


 ).

ProofBy induction on the length of a cycle.

An novice in complexity theory might expect
that a problem is not harder
than the problem's hardest component. However,
combining problems may yield a problem that is harder than each of the
problems when considered separately.
For instance,
  combines context-free grammars with a  simple feature theory similar to the one in Section . Of course, both the
satisfiability problem of this feature theory and
the universal recognition problem of context-free grammars are
decidable.
Nevertheless, Johnson shows that the universal recognition problem
of the combination is undecidable in general.
Johnson also proves that this problem is decidable under the restriction that
the context-free grammar does not contain detours. This restriction
is called the `Off-line Parsability Constraint'.

From Johnson's work, we see that combining problems may change
the complexity from decidable to undecidable.
We claim that combining problems may change also
the complexity from tractable to intractable.
Hence, even when we confine ourselves to decidable problems,
the complexity of the recognition problem of a unification grammar that
uses some feature theory may be higher than
the complexity of the
satisfiability problem of that feature theory.
The claim shows that even under the Off-line Parsability Constraint
the complexity of the feature theory still does not provide an upper
bound on the complexity of the unification grammar.

In the next section we will present a fixed regular grammar.
Then we combine this regular grammar with the feature theory from
 Section  into a unification grammar. The recognition problem of this unification grammar is decidable,
because the regular grammar does not contain detours.
Finally, we will prove by a reduction from  SATISFIABILITY
that the recognition problem of this unification grammar is NP-hard,
which proves the claim by example.

The regular language that we want to recognize is


 .
The rules of a regular grammar G' that generates this language are
 given in Table . 

     The regular grammar in Table     generates the language 


 .

Many other regular grammars could be given for the same language.
However, the one presented, as will be seen later, is sufficient for our
purposes here: that is, the reduction from  SATISFIABILITY.
Obviously, the recognition problem of fixed regular grammar
takes linear time.

In this section, we will present the unification grammar G, which is
a combination of the regular grammar from the previous section and
 the feature theory from Section . There are multiple formalisms for unification grammars.
Most of these formalisms distinguish two components: a constituent
structure and a feature graph. The two components are related
by a mapping from the nodes in the constituent structure to the nodes
in the feature graph.

 Table  contains the grammar rules of unification grammar G.
 The notation for the grammar is similar to .  The rules of Section  are annotated with formulas taken  from the feature theory given in Section . The set of attributes is 


the set of atomic values is


 .
The linear rewrite rules describe how constituents are formed.
The formulas indicate how nodes of the feature-graphs
are related to the non-terminals of the rewrite rules.

 The second rule in the first line of Table  will be used to explain the notation.
The non-terminal on the left-hand side of the rewrite rule is related
to the node denoted by variable x0.
The leftmost non-terminal on the right-hand side of the rewrite rule
is related to the node denoted by variable x1.
The first conjunct of the formula states that the values of the
attributes  ASSIGN is the same for the nodes related to the
non-terminals S and T.
The second conjunct requires that the attribute  ASSIGN
of the node related to the non-terminal S has also the same
value as the
attribute  NEW of node related to the non-terminal T.
We will clarify the use of the grammar by means
of an example.

Example(s)We will show the potential derivation of the string


 .
 On the left of the figures  and  the constituent structure trees are given. The non-terminals
are related to nodes in the feature-graphs by undirected arcs.
 We present the first steps (figure ) and the `final'  result (figure ) of the potential derivation. The reader should check that the feature-graph indeed conforms to the
formulas of the applied rules.

 The potential feature-graph in figure  shows that the rightmost
node should have two different atomic values, indicated by + or -.
Hence this potential feature graph is not valid.  Consequently, the
derivation given above fails, and the string


cannot be generated.

 The following fact results from fact  and the previous example,
which showed that 


 cannot be generated by G.

Fact  4.2   
The language recognized by the unification grammar Gis a proper subset of the regular language


 .

The following fact will be useful in the proof of
 Lemma . The fact states that if S derives  

in
d steps
(


 ), then there are two intermediate stages.
First, S derives


in a steps.
This T derives 

in b steps.
Finally, this A derives 


 in csteps.

    If 


 ,
where


 ,
and


 ,
then
there is a 




such that


(d = a + b + c)and the feature structure


 is associated with T,
where 


if l = p,
and   


if 


 .

In the previous section we combined the regular grammar from
 Section  and the feature theory from  Section  into a unification grammar G. Both the recognition problem of this regular grammar,
and the
satisfiability problem of this feature
theory take polynomial time.
However, we will prove that the recognition problem of
the unification grammar G is NP-hard.
Thus the complexity of the
feature theory does not provide an upper bound on the complexity of
the  grammar that used this feature theory.

First, we will give the reduction from the NP-complete problem SAT
to the recognition problem
of G. Then we will show that this reduction is
computable in polynomial time
and answer preserving.
Thus we have proven that the recognition problem of
the unification grammar G is NP-hard.

The reduction from SAT to the recognition problem of Gmaps propositional logical formulas onto strings.
We assume, without loss of generality, that the indices
of the propositional logical variables are in binary representation.
This reduction, f, is defined by the following four equations:

    The reduction f maps formula 

onto string


 ,
where


 ,
and
v[i]j is a string of the form 


 .

    The reduction f is computable in linear time.

ProofBy induction on the construction of SAT formulas.

    Let 

be a propositional logical formula in conjunctive
normalform, and f the reduction stated above.
Formula 


is a
satisfiable formula if, and only if, string 


is in the
language generated by G.

ProofThe proof of this lemma is split in two subproofs. First, we will prove
that if 

is satisfiable, then w is in the language generated
by G. Second, we will prove that if


is in the language generated by G,
then 

is satisfiable.

 let 

be a satisfiable formula.
Then there is an assignment g such that

(1) if g assigns a truth-value to one occurrence of a variable,
then g assigns that truth-value to all occurrences of that variable
in the formula. In other words, g is consistent.

(2) g assigns truth to the formula. That is, in each clause,
g assigns truth to some literal.


We have to show that 


is generated by G. According
 to Fact   

 .
This string w is
generated by G if, and only if, the string 


is
derived by S. Moreover, 


if and
only if 


 .
 By Fact , each derivation  

 ,
has the
following intermediate steps:

Let us assume that


 ,
only if the
assignment g assigns truth to the k-th literal in the i-th
clause of 

 .
This k-th literal in the i-th clause, is either


or 


 .
In the first
case g assigns truth-value true to variable 


 ,
in
the second case g assigns truth-value false to variable


 .
By induction on the number of substrings wi, we will prove that
under the above made
assumption S derives 


 .

One substring wm:
Let S0 = S derive wm S (


 ),
where k depends on the assignment g:

The non-terminal S derives the empty string in one step.
Thus the feature structure associated with S is


 .
The feature structure associated with T is the unification of


and
the feature structure associated with S:

where 


if 


 ,
and 


if 


 .
The feature structure associated with S0 is

None of the unifications fails, and thus S derives wm.

More than one substring wi:
Let S0 = S derive wi S (


 ):

By the induction hypothesis, we assume that S derives 


Moreover, the feature structure associated with S is


= 

 ,
where 

is a feature structure of the form 


or a unification of such feature
structures.
The feature structure associated with T is the unification of


and
the feature structure associated with S:

In the case that v[i]k is a prefix of wi the feature
 structure () is associated with S0. In the other cases, there is an intermediate step

 and feature structure () is associated with F, where 

is the unification of


and 

 .



 In all cases the unification in () fails only if  

 contains 


 ,
and


fails. But, 


 fails only if g assigns
both truth-value true and truth-value false to variable


 .
Hence


 would fail only if g would be inconsistent, which g is not.
Hence there is a derivation for string 


 if 

is satisfiable.

 suppose that 


is in the language
generated by G.
 By fact   

 ,
where


 .
We will prove that for all i, there is a k such that

1) 



2) the feature structure associated with the non-terminal S        that derives w contains 


where


if 


 ,
and


if 


 .

3) the feature structure associated with the non-terminal S        that derives w does not contain both


and


Then the feature structure associated with the non-terminal Sthat derives w encodes a consistent assignment for 

that
makes every clause of 

true.



Obviously, 


if, and only if, 


 .
 Hence 1) and 2) follow from fact . Because S derives w, the feature structure associated with S does not contain
contradicting information: 3) follows.
This completes the second subproof.

The previous lemma proves that the reduction f from SAT
 to the recognition problem of the unification grammar Gis answer preserving. Lemma  proves that this reduction f is computable in polynomial time.
Hence these two lemmas together prove that the recognition
problem of the unification grammar G is NP-hard.
  show that the complexity result of the recognition problem for unification grammars
that combine a regular grammar and
 the feature theory from Section  is strengthened. An additional NP upper bound is proven
for an arbitrary string and grammar,
which results in an
NP-complete recognition problem.

Lemma  4.8   
Let w be any string and G be any
unification grammar that combines a regular grammar and
 the feature theory from Section . Then the recognition problem for w and G is NP-complete.

ProofAn NP-hard lower bound is proven above. An NP upper bound
is proven when we can guess a solution, and check
that solution in polynomial time.
The NP upper bound is proven as follows.

Given a string w and a grammar G, we can guess a sequence of
O(|w|) rules that encode the derivation for w. The guessed
rules describe a constituent structure tree and a set of formulas.
First, we must check that the constituent structure tree described
by the rules has yield w. Second, we have
to check that the set of formulas describes some feature-graph.

The first check is trivial. The second check is performed by the
 algorithm  FEATUREGRAPHSAT from Section . Clearly, both checks only take polynomial time.

The previous section shows the complexity of a feature
theory does not provide an upper bound for the complexity
of a unification grammar that uses this feature theory.
The question that arises is whether the complexity of a feature
theory provides a lower bound for the complexity
of such a unification grammar.

In general, it seems that the complexity of the combination of
two problems is at least as hard as the complexity of these
two problems in isolation. So one would be tempted to answer
the question
above in the affirmative. However, if a problem A contains
information about solutions for a problem B, and vice versa,
then the combination of A and B may have lower complexity than Aand B in isolation.  For instance, let problem A be the complement
of problem B. Then the combinations `A or B' and `A and B'
have the trivial solutions `always answer yes' and `always answer no',
respectively.

To be more specific, in the case of unification grammars,
there seem to be easy reductions from the unification problem
of a feature theory to the recognition problem of arbitrary
unification grammars that use this feature theory.
In some specific situations, however, these reductions do not exist.
Below, we will present some examples of situations in which the
feature theory does not provide a lower bound for the
recognition problem.

Example(s)

The feature theory does not provide a lower bound if
        the complexity of the recognition problem of the
        grammar component provides a lower bound for the complexity of
        the recognition problem of the unification grammar.
        Consider for instance the class of grammars that generate
        a finite language.
        The combination of a feature theory with a grammar from this
        class yields a unification grammar that generates a finite
        language. Obviously, the recognition problem of this
        unification grammar
        does not depend on the unification problem of the feature
        theory. Hence the lower bound complexity of this class of
        unification grammars is not provided by the complexity of the
        feature theory.

The feature theory does not provide a lower bound if the
        unification grammar uses only a fragment of the feature theory.
        This happens when the unification grammar formalism
        restricts the unification. For instance, the unification grammar
        formalism may demand that feature structures are unified at the
        outermost attributes. This demand implies that the size of the
        feature structures that appear in the fixed unification grammar is
        bounded. Consequently, there have to be feature structures in
        the feature theory that cannot be encoded by the unification
        grammar.
One may object that the obligatory
        unification at the outermost attribute should be incorporated
        in the formalization of the feature theory. Thus reducing
        the complexity of the unification problem of the feature theory.
        However, there is no predefined way to construct unification
        grammars from a feature theory and a grammar component. So,
        there may be many blurred restrictions on the unification.
        These blurred restrictions are the cause that the formalization
        of the feature theory
        may be too expressive and that the unification grammar uses
        only a fragment of the feature theory.



The two examples show that not in all
situations the complexity of the unification problem of the
feature theory provides a lower bound for the complexity of
the recognition problem of the unification grammar. In some special
cases the complexity of the unification grammar may be lower than
the complexity of the feature theory.
Hence care has to be taken for
drawing overhasty conclusions about the lower bound complexity of
the unification grammar from the complexity of the feature theory.

In this paper, we have assessed the complexity results of
formalizations that intend to describe feature theories in
computational linguistics.
These formalizations do not take the constituent structure
component of unification grammars into account. As a result,
the complexity of the unification problem of
feature theories does not provide an upper bound, and need not provide
a lower bound, for the complexity of the recognition problem of
unification grammars using these theories.

Thus the complexity results that have been achieved in
the formalisms of feature theories
are not immediately relevant for unification
grammars used in computational linguistics.
Complexity analyses will only contribute to computational linguistics
if the analyzed formalizations are connected closely with actual
unification grammars.
Therefore, we argue for formalisms that describe
unification grammars as a whole instead of bare feature theories.

Franz Baader, Hans-Jrgen Brckert, Bernhard Nebel, Werner Nutt, and Gert
  Smolka.
On the expressivity of feature logics with negation, functional
  uncertainty, and sort equations.
Journal of Logic, Language and Information, 2(1):1-18, 1993.

Patrick Blackburn and Edith Spaan.
A modal perspective on the computational complexity of attribute
  value grammar.
Journal of Logic, Language and Information, 2(2):129-169,
  1993.

Mark Johnson.
Attribute-Value Logic and the Theory of Grammar, volume 16 of
  CSLI Lecture Notes.
CSLI, Stanford, 1988.

Robert T. Kasper and William C. Rounds.
The logic of unification in grammar.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 13:35-58, 1990.

Gert Smolka.
Feature-constraint logics for unification grammars.
Journal of Logic Programming, 12(1):51-87, 1992.

Leen Torenvliet and Marten Trautwein.
Features that count.
Presented at CLIN V (Fifth Computational Linguistics in the
  Netherlands Meeting), December 1994.

  This research was supported by the
        Linguistic Research Foundation, which is funded by the Netherlands
        organisation for scientific research, NWO
